127 
Followers
The Milky Way
infinity-imagined: " The Tadpole Galaxy "
Cosmos Gravitational Waves Space Photos Space And Astronomy Astronomy Science Hubble Space Space Time Astrophysics Deep Space
New Simulation Offers Stunning Images of Black Hole Merger - Universe Today
A black hole is an extraordinarily massive, improbably dense knot of spacetime that makes a living swallowing or slinging away any morsel of energy that strays too close to its dark, twisted core. Anyone fortunate (or unfortunate) enough to directly observe one of these beasts in the wild would immediately notice the way its colossal gravitational field warps all of ... Continue reading "New Simulation Offers Stunning Images of Black Hole Merger"
Stephen Hawking Carl Sagan Cosmos Foto Fantasy E Mc2 Space And Astronomy Hubble Space To Infinity And Beyond Deep Space Space Exploration
New Telescope to Take First-Ever Black Hole Photo
Researchers are meeting Wednesday to discuss the Event Horizon Telescope, a network of radio telescopes that could snap an image of the supermassive black hole at the heart of our Milky Way galaxy.
Constellations Types Of Galaxies Nasa Solar Mass Hubble Space Telescope Telescope Images Andromeda Galaxy Space Photos Our Solar System
Astronomers find a massive black hole that outgrew its galaxy | Amazing Science
Astronomers have spotted a super-sized black hole in the early universe that grew much faster than its host galaxy. The discovery runs counter to most observations about black holes, which are massive areas of space with extraordinarily strong gravity that can pull in anything — even light. In most cases, black holes and their host galaxies expand at the same rate. This particular black hole formed in the early universe, roughly two billion years after the Big Bang. An international research...
Hubble Pictures Hubble Images Telescope Pictures Medusa Ufo Cosmos Other Galaxies Spiral Galaxy Andromeda Galaxy
Image - Galaxy ESO 137-001
Astronomy Stars Space And Astronomy Nasa Space Black Holes In Space Black Space Neutron Star Stem Science Earth Science Leicester
NASA's Swift Reveals a Black Hole Bull's-eye | Amazing Science
What looks like a shooting target is actually an image of nested rings of X-ray light centered on an erupting black hole. On June 15, NASA's Swift satellite detected the start of a new outburst from V404 Cygni, where a black hole and a sun-like star orbit each other. Since then, astronomers around the world have been monitoring the ongoing light show. On June 30, a team led by Andrew Beardmore at the University of Leicester, U.K., imaged the system using the X-ray Telescope aboard Swift...
Incoming Comet to Buzz Earth in Historic Close Flyby
A comet will zoom past Earth Tuesday morning (March 22) in a close encounter of historic proportions.
