By: Bob King July 9, 2020
51
Get Articles like this sent to your inbox
Email (required) *
Yes, I would like to receive emails from Sky & Telescope. (You can unsubscribe anytime)
Constant Contact Use.
By submitting this form, you are consenting to receive marketing emails from: American Astronomical Society, 1667 K Street NW, Washington, DC, 20006, http://aas.org. You can revoke your consent to receive emails at any time by using the SafeUnsubscribe® link, found at the bottom of every email. Emails are serviced by Constant Contact
Skywatchers are treated to a naked-eye comet as NEOWISE emerges into the the dawn sky.
Debra Ceravolo captured this stunning portrait of Comet NEOWISE (C/2020 F3) at 4 a.m. on July 8, 2020. She used a 300mm astrograph with a 2700mm focal length to make 160, 1-second stacked exposures. The camera was a SBIG STFSC8050 one shot color CCD cooled to –20° C. The resulting image is very similar to the view in a modest telescope.
Whatever you do, see this comet.  I almost couldn't believe my eyes when I pointed a pair of 10×50 binoculars at NEOWISE on July 7th at dawn. OMG.  What a sumptuous view!  The comet's head, a bright, yellow pea, sprouted a 3° pale orange tail that arched upwards in a most elegant way.  With the naked eye, I saw a delicate streak of light about 1.5° long with a tiny, star-like coma. The image of a faint meteor jumped to mind.
A gorgeous pictorial view of the comet on July 7, 2020, was made with a 130mm focal length lens.
Fred Espenak
Far to the right of NEOWISE, Venus and Aldebaran glimmered in Taurus. Comparing the comet to Aldebaran (magnitude +0.9), I estimated its brightness at magnitude 1.4, by far the brightest comet to grace our skies since PanSTARRS (C/2011 L4) in March 2013.  And what timing. Just what we needed for the COVID-19 blues!
Sometimes clouds can add a special beauty to celestial scenes. As a weather front moves into Minnesota at dawn on July 8th, Comet NEOWISE garbs itself in pink clouds.
Bob King
NEOWISE survived its July 3rd perihelion in grand form, glowing around magnitude 0, bright enough for some amateurs to spot it the very same day.  It has since faded to magnitude 1.5–2 but its beauty is undiminished.  In fact, the comet has become more extraordinary over the past few nights because it's slowly climbing higher into a darker sky at the same time that the Moon is waning from full to third quarter.  On July 8th the tail length had doubled to 6° (my estimate), and the comet appeared more obvious to the naked eye than the morning prior.
My older daughter and I share the comet together at dawn on July 11.
Bob King
I've heard from observers who've observed NEOWISE everywhere from the countryside to Los Angeles. The news is good. Check out this report from Richard K. Mitchell:
"Here in Albuquerque, the comet was a beautiful sight this morning (July 7th). I could see it fairly easy with the naked eye but not an obvious sight, but very impressive sight in 10×50 binoculars. So I would encourage anyone in the "burbs" or a smaller city to give it a try."
Advertisement
Comet NEOWISE reflects off a lake near Duluth, Minn. at dusk on July 11. Comets and water naturally go together as they're thought responsible in part for delivering water to the early Earth. Details: 70mm lens, f/2.8, ISO 2000, 20-second time exposure.
Bob King
Or this from Jim Twellman on July 8th: "Observed once again from the I-64 overpass at Lake St Louis (an outlying suburb of St. Louis, MO. ) The comet was easily visible in 10 × 50s but was spectacular in the 15×70s.  Estimate 2.0 magnitude."
The comet tangles with bright noctilucent clouds over Sokol'niki Park, located not far from the center of Moscow, at 1:30 a.m. local time July 10th. "I'm really excited about the comet, said Alexander Vasenin. "I was a teenager last time I saw a comet just with my eyes alone."
Alexander Vasenin
I don't want to give the impression that NEOWISE is super-easy to see — you still need know where to look — but once seen you'll return to it with ease.  Thank goodness for Capella. Located in the comet's vicinity,  this bright star points the way for novice and amateur observers alike.
Daily positions for Comet NEOWISE are shown for  4 a.m. local time July 10–15. The comet wraps up its morning appearance from many locations by mid-month then transitions to an evening object as it zips from Lynx into Ursa Major (see below). Click on the image for a large chart.
Sky & Telescope
You'll spot Comet NEOWISE in late evening twilight as it tickles the paws of Ursa Major later this month. Daily positions for Comet NEOWISE are shown for one hour after sunset July 15–23.
Sky & Telescope
Although NEOWISE sits quite low and appears faint at the start of dawn, it quickly brightens as it gains altitude, offsetting (at least for a time) the intensifying twilight. The best time slot to see the object through July 11–12 is from 2 hours to 1 hour before sunrise. Click here to find when the Sun rises for your location. With 10×50  binoculars I've been able to follow the comet up to within 40 minutes of sunup.
The comet's bifurcated tail stands out clearly in this sketch I made with Photoshop from observations using a 10-inch reflector at low magnification at 3:50 a.m. CDT on July 7th. The false nucleus glowed brilliant yellow, the tail a delicate shade of orange.
Bob King
Through a telescope the colors are even more intense, but the most remarkable sight is the comet's bifurcated tail — split in two by a dark, U-shaped channel. This feature is also visible in binoculars and photographs, but far more dramatic in a scope. I use a portable 10-inch f/4.5 Dobsonian at low magnification (48×). Bifurcated tails appear in comets that are actively producing massive quantities of dust either after a close passage to the Sun or during a major outburst.
A faint, tendrily ion tail appears just above NEOWISE's prominent dust tail on July 7, 2020.
Michael Jaeger
NEOWISE has a prominent dust tail, formed when dust-rich ice vaporizes in the Sun's heat. Micron-size dust particles scatter sunlight and glow faintly yellow. An enormous amount of dust must concentrate near the false nucleus because its yellow color is unmistakable. The comet is also developing a fainter, blue-hued ion tail from fluorescing carbon monoxide. Few observers have noted the ion tail visually yet, but you can't miss it in Michael Jaeger's photo.
Comet NEOWISE's complex and spectacular tail is becoming more evident as it climbs higher at dawn and the Moon's phase wanes.  Details: Wupatki National Monument, Arizona
3:52-3:57 AM MST  with a Canon EOS 6D Mark II and 300mm focal length lens at f/5.6. ISO 800, 12 stacked 15 second exposures.
Jeremy Perez
Dawn comet viewing will be best through about July 18th, with the evening apparition starting about July 12th and continuing the remainder of the summer. Between July 12–18 you can observe it at both dusk and dawn.
This photo, taken July 8, 2020, from Thunder Bay, Ontario, perfectly captures the comet's naked-eye appearance. Details: 80mm focal length at f/4, ISO 400 and 2-second exposure.
Dave Gallant
So set your alarm and plan to be out about 2 hours before sunrise (for now). Find a location with a good view of the northeastern sky, and don't forget to bring binoculars and a camera. Most mobile phone photos will look grainy, but a basic DSLR on a tripod at ISO 800 with a 2-second exposure will net you an image you'd be happy to share on social media.
Synchronic bands stripe Comet NEOWISE's broad dust tail in this image from July 10th. One model posits their formation to individual fragments or chunks shed by the comet that crumble into fine dust in sequential fashion. The comet's ion tail is the narrow streak above the dust tail. Recent data from NASA's NEOWISE spacecraft indicate the comet has a larger than usual nucleus with a diameter around 5 kilometers. This may explain the incredible amount of dust activity we're seeing.
Michael Jaeger
I hope good weather comes your way so you can see Comet NEOWISE while it's still bright. Nothing would make me happier. By the time I wrapped up my July 7th observation I felt like I was floating on air with light beams shooting from my fingertips. As the comet vaporizes to create one of the most beautiful sky sights in years, you may just find that it will melt your heart, too.
While the dust tail is bright and obvious with the naked eye, the comet's blue ion tail is more subtle. It extends straight up to the left of the dust tail on July 11th. Details: 200mm lens at f/2.8, 13-second exposure at ISO 400 on a tracking mount.
Bob King
If you have a telescope and a cell phone try taking a picture of the comet in the brightening dawn sky. I took this photo through a 10-inch scope at 56× with a basic cellphone on July 10.
Bob King
Update July 11: Despite fading to around magnitude 2, Comet NEOWISE is becoming easier to see with an ever-lengthening tail. I traced it to 5° with the naked eye and 9° with binoculars on July 11. The nucleus has faded somewhat but still glows intensely yellow due to a combination of dust and sodium emission.  Also, the comet is entering the evening sky just now particularly for viewers in the northern U.S., Canada and northern Europe.
On July 11 Chris Schur used an objective prism on his 150mm lens to photograph the comet's spectrum. The bright yellow lines are from sodium emission while the blue and green highlights are the Swan Bands of carbon and cyanogen. Chris Schur
Since Comet NEOWISE began it evening apparition, astrophotographers could begin taking deeper images untainted by morning moonlight. Michael Jaeger recorded incredible detail in both tails on July 12 from a mountain location. The narrow ion tail measures at least 16° long! Michael Jaeger
Tags
