Orion® IntelliScope® Computerized Object Locator #7880 InStruCtIOn ManuaL Providing Exceptional Consumer Optical Products Since 1975 Customer Support (800) 676-1343 E-mail: support@telescope.com Corporate Offices (831) 763-7000 89 Hangar Way, Watsonville, CA 95076 © 2004-2011 Orion Telescopes & Binoculars IN 229 Rev. I 11/15 2 Figure 1. The IntelliScope Computerized Object Locator. Backlit liquid-crystal display User-friendly keypad Illuminated pushbuttons Coil cable jack RS-232 jack Congratulations on your purchase of the Orion IntelliScope™ Com-puterized Object Locator. When used with any of the SkyQuest XT IntelliScope Dobsonians, the object locator (controller) will provide quick, easy access to thousands of celestial objects for viewing with your telescope. The controller's user-friendly keypad combined with its database of more than 14,000 celestial objects put the night sky literally at your fingertips. You just select an object to view, press Enter, then move the telescope manually following the guide arrows on the liquid crystal display (LCD) screen. In seconds, the IntelliScope's high-resolution, 9,216-step digital encoders pinpoint the object, placing it smack-dab in the telescope's field of view. Easy! Compared to motor-dependent computerized telescopes systems, IntelliScope is faster, quieter, easier, and more power efficient. And IntelliScope Dobs eschew the complex initialization, data entry, or "drive training" procedures required by most other computer-ized telescopes. Instead, the IntelliScope setup involves simply pointing the scope to two bright stars and pressing the Enter key. That's it — then you're ready for action! These instructions will help you set up and properly operate your IntelliScope Computer-ized Object Locator. Please read them thoroughly. 3 table of Contents 1. Installation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 2. Alignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 3. Overview of Controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 4. Locating the Planets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 5. Locating Deep-Sky Objects by Catalog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 6. Locating Deep Sky Objects by Object Type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 7. Locating Stars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 8. Tours of the Best Objects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 9. The Identify Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 10. Adding User-Defined Objects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 11. The FCN Button . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 12. The "Hidden" Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 13. Specifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 Appendix A: Troubleshooting the IntelliScope System . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 Appendix B: Alignment Star Finder Charts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 Appendix C: Constellation Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 Appendix D: ST Catalog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32 Parts List Your IntelliScope Computerized Object Locator comes with the following parts: Qty. Description 1 Object locator (controller) 1 Altitude encoder assembly 1 Coil cable 1 Altitude encoder cable (53" long) 1 Azimuth encoder cable (24" long) 6 Wire retaining clips 2 Hook-and-loop strips (1 "hook" strip, 1 "loop" strip) 1 Plastic bumper 3 Wood screws 2 Nylon washers (1/16" thick) 1 9-volt battery The only tool needed for installation is a Phillips-head screwdriver. Remove the optical tube from the base to begin installation. Note: The IntelliScope Computerized Object Locator is compatible only with Orion Sky-Quest IntelliScope Dobsonians. For other brands of Dobsonian, or any other telescope, the IntelliScope system will not function properly. 1. Installation 1) Install the altitude encoder assembly onto the base's right side panel. This is the side of the base opposite the side with the IntelliScope Computerized Controller Port. Below the 5/8" through-hole in the panel, there are two pre-drilled starter holes in the inward-facing surface (Figure 2). Take two of the supplied wood screws and push them through the two slotted holes in the bottom of the altitude encoder's com-puter board. The screw heads should be on the same side as the altitude encoder's modular jack. Now, with the screws pushed through the encoder board, place a nylon washer on the end of each screw (Figure 3). Then, thread the screws into the starter holes in the side panel. The shaft on the altitude encoder assembly should protrude through the 5/8" through-hole in the side panel. It will take a bit of dexterity to keep the washers on the ends of the screws when installing, so don't 4 Figure 2. The two pilot holes used to mount the altitude encoder assembly are located on the interior surface of the right side panel of the base. Altitude encoder pilot holes get frustrated if it takes a couple tries. The screws should not be fully tight-ened; they should be tight, but not tight enough to prevent the altitude encoder from moving up and down within the slots in the encoder board. 2) There is a pilot hole above the 5/8" through hole in the right side panel's interior surface; this is where the plastic bumper that protects the altitude encod-er assembly will be installed. Take the remaining wood screw, push it through the bumper, and thread it into the pilot hole until tight (Figure 4). 3) Connect one end of the azimuth encod-er cable (the shorter of the two cables to the encoder jack in the top baseplate of the Dobsonian base. Connect the other end to the encoder connector board that should be already installed on the base's left side panel. The cable should plug into the jack on the left side of the encoder connector board (Figure 5). 4) Connect one end of the altitude encoder cable to the modular jack on the altitude encoder assembly. Connect the other end of the cable to the jack on the right side of the encoder connector board (Figure 5). 5) Use the provided wire clips to secure the altitude and azimuth cables neatly to the base. We recommend using two clips for the (shorter) azimuth cable, and four clips for the (longer) altitude cable (Figure 6). The clips have adhesive backing; simply peel the paper off the back of the clip and press the adhesive back to the base where you want the clip to be located. 6) Place the telescope optical tube into the base. Be very careful not to hit the altitude encoder with the side bearing on the tube when doing this or damage to the encoder could result. The bumper helps to prevent such contact. 7) Reinstall the telescope's tensioning knob (the one with the Teflon and metal wash-ers) through the base's left side panel (the side with the IntelliScope Computerized Controller Port label) and into the threaded hole in the center of the tube's side bearing. 8) Reinstall the telescope's retaining knob, inserting the bolt through the altitude encod-er's aluminum shaft (now protruding from the right side panel) and threading it into the right side bearing (Figure 7). Make sure this knob is fully tightened. 9) Insert one end of the coil cable into the larger of the two jacks on the top of the IntelliScope controller (Figure 1). Insert the other end into the "IntelliScope Com-puterized Controller Port" on the left side of the base. 5 Figure 3. Place a nylon washer on the end of each screw after the screws are pushed through the altitude encoder assembly. Altitude encoder assembly Nylon washers Wood screws Modular jack Figure 4. Install the bumper into the pilot hole above the altitude encoder assembly. Altitude encoder shaft 10) Two hook-and-loop strips (one strip of "hooks" and one strip of "loops") have been provided to hang the IntelliScope controller in a convenient location on the base when not in use. Place the "hooks" strip on the back of the control-ler, and the "loops" strip on the base in a convenient spot. Make certain the location of the strip on the base will not cause the controller to interfere with the motions of the mount. 11) Slide the battery cover off the back of the hand control and insert the 9-volt alkaline battery. Make sure the positive and negative terminals of the battery are oriented as shown in the bottom of the battery compartment. Replace the battery cover. Your IntelliScope Computerized Object Locator is now installed and ready to be used. 2. alignment This section will familiarize you with the align-ment procedure for the IntelliScope system. Powering the Controller To turn the controller on, firmly press the Power button. The LED lights will activate and the LCD screen will display its introduction message. The intensity of the illumination can be adjusted by repeatedly pressing the Power button. There are five levels of LED bright-ness. Choose a brightness level that suits your conditions and needs. (Dimmer settings will prolong battery life.) To turn the controller off, press and hold the Power button for a few seconds, then release it. To conserve battery life, the controller is programmed to shut itself off after being idle for 50 minutes. So, make sure to press a button at least once every 50 minutes if you do not want the controller to turn off. If the controller does turn off, you will need to perform the initial alignment procedure again. If the LCD screen and the button backlighting automatically begin to dim, it's time to change batteries. Initial Vertical alignment After powering up the controller, the top line of the LCD display will read: "POINT VERTI-CAL." If the top line reads "ALIGN DEC MARK", simply press the up arrow button. The top line will now read "POINT VERTICAL", and you are set to use the object locator with your IntelliScope Dobsonian. 6 Figure 5. The azimuth cable plugs into the jack on the left of the encoder connector board. The altitude cable plugs into the jack on the right. Altitude cable jack Azimuth cable jack If the vertical stop you installed on the Dobsonian base during assembly of the telescope is properly adjusted (see below), simply rotate the telescope upward in alti-tude until the bottom of the tube comes into contact with the vertical stop. Once the telescope tube is in the vertical position, press the Enter button to start the two-star alignment procedure. adjusting the Vertical Stop In order for the IntelliScope system to work accurately, the vertical stop must be pre-cisely adjusted so that the optical tube is truly perpendicular to the azimuth axis of the base when the controller says "POINT VERTICAL." For most IntelliScope models, the vertical stop must use the two 1/16"-thick washers, and the 1/32"-thick washer to achieve this. These parts, plus an extra washer, are supplied with the Dobsonian base. If you do not have access to a carpenter's level, then all three washers will be the best you can do to adjust the vertical stop. For the most precise adjustment of the vertical stop (which will allow the best pointing accuracy to be achieved), you should use a carpenter's level. Any hardware store will have one. First, make sure the base itself is level. Place the carpenter's level on the top ground board and rotate the base 180˚ in azimuth (Figure 8). The level should indicate that the base is level through the entire rotation. If it isn't, then reposition the base on the ground, or place shims underneath the feet until the base stays level though a 180˚ rotation. 7 Figure 7. The retaining knob goes through the shaft of the altitude encoder assembly before threading into the side bearing on the telescope tube. Figure 6. Use the wire clips to secure the cables neatly to the base. (a.) For the XT6i, XT8i, and XT10i IntelliScopes, the altitude cable can be routed across the top baseplate. (b.) For the XT12i, the altitude cable is routed across the front brace. Wire clips Altitude cableTop baseplate Wire clips Altitude cable Front brace a. b. Next, place the 1/16"-thick washers and the 1/32"-thick washer on the vertical stop screw, and thread the entire assembly into the insert in the base's front brace. Now, rotate the telescope upwards in altitude until the mirror cell of the telescope comes into contact with the vertical stop. Place the car-penter's level across the top of the telescope as shown in Figure 9, in the direction paral-lel to the base's side panels, perpendicular to the front panel. (Be sure to remove the dust cover from the front of the telescope before placing the carpenter's level on it.) Is the top of the tube level? If so, you are finished adjusting the vertical stop. If not, add or remove a washer to the vertical stop screw until the top of the tube is level when the mirror cell comes into contact with the vertical stop. Once the vertical stop is accurately adjust-ed, it should not need adjustment again. The base does not need to be level for the IntelliScope system to function properly; the base only needs leveling when initially setting the vertical stop. Simple two-Star alignment After setting the vertical position of the optical tube, a simple two-star alignment process is all that is needed to ready the IntelliScope system for operation. This is a great simplification from other computer-ized systems, which require you to enter data such as your longitude, latitude, and time zone. For the IntelliScope controller to accurately find objects, you only need to center two bright stars in your telescope and indicate to the controller which two stars you have centered. This is quite easy to do. For your convenience, we have provided finder charts for the alignment stars in Appendix B. Use the finder chart to locate and identify two bright stars in your current night sky. For best results, choose two stars that are at least 60˚ apart from each other. (The width of your fist at arm's length is about 10˚, so you want the stars to be at least six fist-widths apart.) So, the optical tube is now in the vertical position and you've chosen two bright stars in the sky to use for alignment. The telescope should have a high power eyepiece, such as the 10mm Sirius Plössl, in the eyepiece holder and the finder scope should be properly aligned with the telescope (these procedures are described in your telescope's manual). The LCD screen will state on its top line "ALIGN STAR 1," with the name of a star flash-ing on the second line. 8 Figure 9. Once the base is leveled, point the tube up until the mirror cell comes into contact with the vertical stop. Then, place the carpenter's level across the top of the tube as shown. If the vertical stop is set properly, the top of the tube should also be level. Figure 8. Place a carpenter's level on the base as shown. The base should stay level through a 180˚ rotation in azimuth. Once the vertical stop is set, the base does not need to be level to function properly. Use the arrow buttons to scroll through the names of the alignment stars. The up arrow button scrolls through the stars alphabetically from A to Z. The down arrow button scrolls alphabetically backwards, from Z to A. When you arrive at the name of the star you wish to align on, you can begin to move the telescope so that it is pointing at that star (but don't press the Enter button yet). Note: The controller will not accept Polaris as the first alignment star. This helps prevent the pointing accuracy from decreasing over time. It is OK to use Polaris as the second alignment star, however. Take hold of the "navigation knob" on the optical tube and move the telescope so that it is pointing in the general area of the alignment star. Aim the telescope so the alignment star appears in the finder scope. Be careful not to confuse the alignment star with other stars in the area when doing this. (It will likely be the brightest star in the field of view.) Now, move the telescope until you have centered the star on the crosshairs of the finder scope. Look into the eyepiece of the telescope, and you should see the alignment star in the field of view of the eyepiece. If it isn't there, then your finder scope is out of alignment with your telescope and will need to be adjusted. Once the alignment star is in the eye-piece's field of view, center it in the eyepiece as best you can by making small movements to the telescope. (If you have one, an illuminated reticle eyepiece is great for centering alignment stars). Once this is done, press the Enter button on the controller. You have now completed one-half of the two-star alignment. The LCD screen will now read "ALIGN STAR 2" on the first line with an alignment star's name flashing on the second line. As before, scroll through the names of the stars with the arrow buttons until you reach your second chosen alignment star. Repeat the pro-cedure described above for your second alignment star. When you have aligned on the second star, press the Enter button. The LCD will then briefly display a number. It is the alignment error factor, or "warp" (W) factor. the alignment Error (Warp) Factor The "warp" alignment error factor essentially lets you know if your alignment was accurate or not. Ideally, this number should be as low as possible, but any "W" of 0.5 or smaller is acceptable (regardless of + or - sign). Warp factors of ±0.3 and ±0.4 are the most com-mon. Warp factors under ±0.2 are great, but are less commonly achieved. If you complete an alignment and the warp factor is larger than ±0.5 (e.g., +0.6, -0.6, +0.7, -0.7, etc.), then you should turn the controller off (by holding down the Power button) and begin the alignment procedure again. Otherwise, there is no guarantee that the controller will con-sistently place objects within the field of view of a medium-low power eyepiece. An unacceptable warp factor may indicate that you aligned on the wrong star or did not have the telescope initially in a precisely vertical position. If you are having problems getting the warp factor at or below ±0.5, see the troubleshooting section in Appendix A. Your IntelliScope Computerized Object Locator is now ready to find objects. Replace the high-powered eyepiece you used for centering the alignment stars with a low-power, wide-field eyepiece, such as the 25mm Sirius Plössl. 9 3. Overview of Controller The IntelliScope Computerized Object Loca-tor has been specifically designed for ease of use. This section will help familiarize you with the basic layout and operation of the controller. Pushbuttons Besides the Power, Enter, ID, FCN, and up/down arrows, all pushbuttons have let-ters on them with numbers above them. The letters designate the function of the pushbutton. The numbers above them are used for entering numerical data only; the numbers are never active until a function is first chosen. The numbers are arranged like a telephone keypad for ease of num-ber entry. None of the function buttons will work properly until an initial alignment, as outlined previously, is completed. If you press a function button before the two-star alignment is completed, the controller will dis-play "MUST STAR ALIGN." Turn the unit off, then on again (by using the Power button), to begin the alignment routine again. the Guide arrows The controller leads you to astronomical targets with guide arrows displayed on the LCD screen. After an object is selected to view, you will see two guide arrows, one that points left or right, and one that points up or down. Move the telescope tube in the correspond-ing direction of the guide arrows. If you are standing to the left of the telescope and facing the same direction the telescope is pointed, the guide arrows will exactly correspond with the direction you should move the telescope (Figure 10). Otherwise, if an up arrow is dis-played, move the telescope tube upward, if a down arrow is displayed, move the telescope tube downward, if a left arrow is displayed, rotate the telescope counterclockwise, and if a right arrow is displayed, rotate the telescope clockwise. There is a number next to each guide arrow that indicates how far the telescope needs to be moved to reach the selected object. As you move the telescope toward the object, this number will decrease. When the number goes below ten, the figure will be displayed in tenths; this helps to make small, precise movements to the telescope tube in order to bring the object into your field of view. When both numbers reach 0.0, stop moving the telescope. The object should appear within the field of view of a medium-low power eyepiece (25mm focal length or longer). For example, look at Figure 11a, which shows an LCD screen for someone trying to locate M51, the Whirlpool Galaxy. The first arrow is pointing right and gives a number of 34. The second arrow is pointing up and displays the number 12. This means that the telescope tube should be moved to the right (clockwise) and up. When you are close to M51, the numbers will be displayed in tenths, as shown in Figure 11b. When the num-bers reach 0.0 (Figure 11c), the telescope will be pointed right at the Whirlpool Galaxy. 10 Figure 10. If you stand to the left of the telescope, and face the direction the tube is pointing, the guide arrows will correspond exactly with the direction you should move the telescope in order to find the selected object. It is easiest to move the telescope in one direction at a time (say altitude) until the cor-responding number reaches 0.0. Then move the scope in the other direction (azimuth) until that number also reads 0.0. If the object selected to view is currently located below the horizon, the word "HORIZON" will flash before the guide arrows are displayed. Choose another object to view. 4. Locating the Planets By far the most popular objects for viewing, after the Moon, are the planets. Since the other eight planets in our solar system (we still include Pluto, for the sake of nostalgia!) are also orbiting the Sun, they do not appear in fixed positions in the night sky like deep-sky objects and stars do. Because of this, the controller requires you to input the date before it can find the planets. To find planets with your IntelliScope Computerized Object Locator, use the following procedure: 1) Press the Planet button on the controller. 2) The LCD screen will display a date similar to the following: DatE 01 Jun 2012 3) The number after the word "DATE" will be flashing and represents the day of the month. Input the two-digit day using the number buttons. 4) The three-letter month will now be flashing. Use the arrow buttons to scroll to the present month and then press the Enter button. 5) Now the year will flash. Input the year using the number buttons. If you make a mistake while inputting the date, press the Enter button at any time while still within the Planet button function. The LCD screen will then display the last date input, with the two-digit day after the word "DATE" flashing. Input the correct date as outlined above. 11 Figure 11. This sequence of pictures illustrate how the controller's guide arrows will look as you are finding an object. (a.) When you are far away from the object, there will be a number (from 10 to 179) to the left of the guide arrows. (b.) When you are close to the object, each guide arrow will display a number on its immediate left (from 0 to 9) and immediate right (from 0 to 9); the number on the left is whole number increments, while the number on the right is in increments of tenths. This helps in making small movements to the telescope to pinpoint the object's location. (c.) When the guide arrows display "0.0 0.0", the object will be within the field of view of the telescope (with a 25mm or longer focal length eyepiece). a. b. c. Now, to choose a planet to view, press the arrow buttons and scroll through the planets. The planet's name will be displayed in the upper left section of the LCD screen, with the guide arrows on the upper right of the LCD screen. Move the telescope in the cor-responding direction shown by the guide arrows. The lower left screen shows the constellation that the planet appears in, with its present coordinates given in right ascension and declination. When you are finished viewing the planet, you may scroll to another planet by using the arrow buttons. The features and details you can see will vary from planet to planet. The following descriptions give a brief overview of what to expect when viewing them: MERCURY Mercury is often so close to the Sun that it cannot be seen. Sometimes it is visible for a brief period after the Sun sets, and sometimes it's visible in the morning just before the Sun rises. Mercury does not really show any detail, but is quite bright. With your telescope, you will be able to investigate this planet's orange-colored hue. Like Venus, Mercury sometimes appears as a crescent, rather than as a full disk. VENUS At its brightest, Venus is the most luminous object in the sky, excluding the Sun and the Moon. It is so bright that sometimes it is visible to the naked eye during full day-light! Ironically, Venus appears as a thin crescent, not a full disk, when at its peak bright-ness. Because it is close to the Sun, it never wanders too far from the morning or evening horizon. No surface markings can be seen on Venus, which is always shrouded in dense clouds. MARS The Red Planet makes its closest approach to Earth every two years. During close approaches you'll see a red disk, possibly some light and dark regions, and maybe the polar ice cap. To see surface detail on Mars, you will need a high power eyepiece and very steady air! JUPITER The largest planet, Jupiter, is a great subject for observation. You can see the disk of the giant planet and watch the ever-changing positions of its four largest moons — Io, Callisto, Europa, and Ganymede. Higher power eyepieces should bring out the cloud bands on the planet's disk and maybe even the Great Red Spot. SATURN The ringed planet is a breathtaking sight when it is well positioned. The tilt angle of the rings varies over a period of many years; sometimes they are seen edge-on, while at other times they are broadside and look like giant "ears" on each side of Saturn's disk. A steady atmosphere (good seeing) is necessary for a good view. You will probably see a bright "star" close by, which is Saturn's brightest moon, Titan. URANUS Uranus is a faint planet, and requires high powers (at least 100x) before it starts to show any detail that distinguishes it from stars. Uranus will appear as a pale, blue-green disk. NEPTUNE Like Uranus, Neptune will require high powers before showing anything to distinguish itself from stars. Neptune will appear as a bluish-colored disk, possibly with a very faint moon nearby if you are using a larger-aperture IntelliScope. PLUTO Smaller than our own Moon, Pluto is very, very faint and shows little more than a point of light similar to a star. Even the Hubble Space Telescope is unable to show much detail on Pluto. Many amateur astronomers note how Pluto moves with respect to background stars (over several nights) in order to confirm their observation of our most remote planet. 12 5. Locating Deep-Sky Objects by Catalog Catalogs are groups of deep sky objects of interest that have been assembled and given designations. Very often a deep-sky object will have a catalog number, as well as a "com-mon" name. For example, the Orion Nebula is listed in the Messier catalog as "M42." The controller has three catalogs built-in: The Messier catalog (M), the New General Catalog (NGC), and the Index Catalog (IC). Many of the objects in the Messier catalog also have NGC catalog designations. the Messier Catalog The Messier catalog contains 109 galaxies, nebulas, and star clusters identified by the famous French astronomer Charles Messier and his colleagues in the late 1700's. These are some of the most popular celestial attractions observed by amateur astronomers. To view an object from the Messier catalog, press the M button. Then enter the number of the Messier object you wish to view using the numeric buttons and press the Enter button. For example, to view Messier 57, also known as "the Ring Nebula," you would press the M button, then press the "5" button, then press the "7" button, followed by the Enter button. If the number of the Messier object you wish to view contains three digits, it is not necessary to press Enter after inputting the third digit. The object's catalog designation will be shown in the upper left corner of the display screen, with the guide arrows in the upper right. The lower left will display the constella-tion the object resides in and the object's common name (if it has one) or a brief descrip-tion of the object. Move the telescope in the corresponding directions shown by the guide arrows to locate the object. You can get more information about the selected object by pressing the Enter button. The second line of the LCD display will then cycle information about the object you are viewing such as its celestial coordinates (R.A. and Dec.), magnitude (brightness), size (in arc-minutes or arc-seconds), and a brief scrolling text description. When you are finished viewing the selected Messier object, you may scroll to another Messier object by using the arrow buttons, or you can select another Messier object to view by pressing the M button again. the new General Catalog The New General Catalog, or NGC, is a catalog of some 7,840 deep-sky objects com-piled by the Danish astronomer J. L. E. Dreyer in the late 1800s. It contains hundreds of excellent examples of each type of deep-sky object and is the most well known and used catalog by amateur astronomers beyond the already mentioned Messier catalog. To be more precise, the version of the New General Catalog used in the IntelliScope Computer-ized Object Locator is an improved version known as the "Revised New General Catalog"; this version has many corrections from Dreyer's original list. To view an object from the NGC catalog, press the NGC button. Then enter the number of the NGC object you wish to view using the numeric buttons and press Enter. For example, to view the Andromeda Galaxy, which is listed as NGC224, you would press the NGC button, then the "2" button twice, then the "4" button, followed by the Enter button. If the number of the NGC object you wish to view contains four digits, it is not necessary to press Enter after inputting the fourth digit. 13 The object's catalog designation will be shown in the upper left corner of the LCD screen, with the guide arrows in the upper right. The lower left will show the constellation the object resides in, and the object's common name (if it has one) or a brief description of the object will be shown in the lower right. Move the telescope in the corresponding direc-tions shown by the guide arrows. You can get more information about the selected object by pressing the Enter button. The second line of the LCD display will then cycle information about the object you are viewing such as its celestial coordinates (R.A. and Dec.), magnitude (brightness), size (in arc-minutes or arc-seconds), and a brief scrolling text description. When you are finished viewing the selected NGC object, you may scroll to another NGC object by using the arrow buttons, or you can select another NGC object to view by press-ing the NGC button again. the Index Catalog The Index Catalog, or IC, contains 5,386 objects discovered in the decade or so after the NGC catalog was first published. This list contains objects similar to the NGC, but IC objects are typically fainter and more difficult to observe. To view an object from the IC catalog, press the IC button. Then input the number of the IC object you wish to view using the numeric buttons and press the Enter button. For example, to view the Flaming Star Nebula, which is listed as IC405, you would press the IC button, then the "4" button, then the "0" button, then the "5" button, followed by the Enter button. If the number of the IC object you wish to view contains four digits, it is not necessary to press Enter after inputting the fourth digit. The object's catalog designation will be shown in the upper left corner of the LCD screen, with the guide arrows in the upper right. The lower left will show the constellation the object resides in, and the object's common name (if it has one) or a brief description of the object will be shown in the lower right. Move the telescope in the corresponding direc-tions shown by the guide arrows. You can get more information about the selected object by pressing the Enter button. The second line of the LCD display will then cycle information about the object you are viewing such as its celestial coordinates (R.A. and Dec.), magnitude (brightness), size (in arc-minutes or arc-seconds), and a brief scrolling text description. When you are finished viewing the selected IC object, you may scroll to another IC object by using the arrow buttons, or you can select another IC object to view by pressing the IC button again. 6. Locating Deep Sky Objects by Object type Rather than trying to select objects by catalog numbers, you may wish to simply view certain types of objects. This is where the Nebula, Galaxy, and Cluster buttons come in handy. These buttons will access a selection of the best and brightest nebulas, galaxies, and star clusters in the night sky. The Nebula, Cluster and Galaxy buttons are organized by constellation. So, before using these buttons, decide in which constellation you would like to view an object. Choose a constellation that is at least 40˚ high in the sky to get a good view. If you are 14 unsure of the constellations currently visible in your night sky, consult a planisphere or the monthly star chart at www.oriontelescopes.com. Locating nebulas Among the most beautiful objects in the night sky, nebulas are clouds of dust and gas that are lit by a nearby stellar source. There are several different types: emission nebu-las, which are where star systems form; planetary nebulas, which are the result of a star dying; and reflection nebulas, caused by dust reflecting starlight. Most have low surface brightness, so a dark sky free of light-pollution is best for viewing them. To view a nebula, press the Nebula button on the controller. The LCD screen will then display the word "NEBULA" with a flashing three-letter constellation designation after it. Now, select the constellation in which you would like to view a nebula. Use the arrow buttons to scroll through the list of constellations. If you are unsure which constellation the three-letter designation represents, refer to Appendix C. Once you have selected the constellation, press Enter. A nebula in that constellation will now appear on the LCD screen, along with the guide arrows to lead you to the nebula. The current constellation is shown in the lower left, and the nebula's proper name or catalog number is in the lower right. For more information about the nebula selected, press the Enter button. To go to the next nebula in the selected constellation, simply press the up arrow button. The guide arrows will now direct you to the next nebula in the constellation. If there are no more nebulas available in that constellation, a nebula from the next constellation (in alphabetical order) will be displayed. To select another constellation in which to view nebulas, press the Nebula button again. Locating Star Clusters Star clusters are just what their name implies; groupings of stars. Star clusters come in two main types, open and globular. Open star clusters reside within our Milky Way galaxy and usually contain a handful of stars clustered together because they were spawned from the same gas cloud. Globular clusters are more like miniature galaxies, with hun-dreds or thousands of stars packed into a spherical shape by mutual gravity. Globular clusters reside outside the disk of the Milky Way galaxy and orbit the galaxy's center. It is believed that globular clusters are formed as a natural consequence of galaxy formation. Star clusters, in general, are somewhat bright compared to other deep-sky objects, so many will appear quite spectacular, even in smaller telescopes. To view a star cluster, press the Cluster button on the controller. The LCD screen will then display the word "STAR CLUSTER" with a flashing three-letter constellation desig-nation after it. Now, select the constellation in which you would like to view a star cluster. Use the arrow buttons to scroll through the list of constellations. If you are unsure which constellation the three-letter designation represents, refer to Appendix C. Once you have selected the constellation, press Enter. A star cluster in that constellation will now appear on the LCD screen, along with the guide arrows to lead you to the star cluster. The cur-rent constellation is shown in the lower left, and the star cluster's proper name or catalog number is in the lower right. For more information about the star cluster selected, press the Enter button. To go to the next star cluster in the selected constellation, simply press the up arrow button. The guide arrows will now direct you to the next star cluster in the constellation. If there are no more star clusters available in that constellation, a star cluster from the next constellation (in alphabetical order) will be displayed. To select another constellation in which to view a star cluster, press the Cluster button again. 15 Locating Galaxies Nebulas may be beautiful and star clusters impressive, but nothing has quite the breath-taking power of observing a galaxy. Galaxies are collections of billions of stars that come in a variety of shapes and sizes. Viewing a galaxy always gives the observer a revelation of just how vast our universe truly is. Keep in mind, however, that most galaxies are quite faint, and may be challenging to identify, especially in smaller telescopes. To view a galaxy, press the Galaxy button on the controller. The LCD screen will then display the word "GALAXY" with a flashing three-letter constellation designation after it. Now, select the constellation in which you would like to view a galaxy. Use the arrow but-tons to scroll through the list of constellations. If you are unsure which constellation the three-letter designation represents, refer to Appendix C. Once you have selected the con-stellation, press Enter. A galaxy in that constellation will now appear on the LCD screen, along with the guide arrows to lead you to the galaxy. The current constellation is shown in the lower left, and the galaxy's proper name or catalog number is in the lower right. If you wish to have more information about the galaxy selected, press the Enter button. To go to the next galaxy in the selected constellation, simply press the up arrow button. The guide arrows will now direct you to the next galaxy in the constellation. If there are no more galaxies available in that constellation, a galaxy from the next constellation (in alphabetical order) will be displayed. To select another constellation in which to view galaxy, press the Galaxy button again. 7. Locating Stars The IntelliScope database contains 837 stars. Stars always appear like tiny points of light. Even powerful telescopes cannot magnify a star to appear as more than a point of light! You can, however, enjoy the different colors of the stars and locate many pretty double and multiple stars. You can also monitor variable stars from night to night to see how their brightness changes over time. To view a star, press the Star button on the controller. The LCD screen will then display the word "STAR" with the word "NAMED" flashing next to it. From this screen, use the ar-row buttons to choose from "NAMED," "DOUBLE," "VARIABLE," and "CATALOG." named Stars The named stars are the brightest in the night sky. These are the stars that the ancients gave proper names to, like "Arcturus" or "Mizar." To select a named star, press Enter after selecting "NAMED" from the Star button choices. You can now use the arrow buttons to scroll through the list of named stars. The stars are listed in alphabetical order. Once you have found the named star you would like to observe, the guide arrows will direct you to move the telescope to the star's position. The upper left corner of the LCD screen will show the named star's ST catalog number (the IntelliScope's entire ST catalog is printed in Appendix D for easy reference), and the lower left shows the constellation in which the star resides. Pressing Enter again will display the star's R.A. and Dec. coordinates, its magnitude, and a brief description. To find another named star to observe, simply continue scrolling through the list of named stars. 16 Double (and Multiple) Stars Many stars in the night sky appear to be single stars, but they are not. They are actually double or multiple star systems. Some of these systems comprise two or more stars grav-itationally bound to each other, while others are just two (or more) stars in the same line of sight. At high magnifications, it is possible to "split" many double (and multiple) stars into their individual components. It can also be interesting to contrast and compare the different colors and magnitudes of the stars in the system. Be aware, however, that good seeing conditions are critical for separating close components of a double or multiple star. To select a double (or multiple) star to observe, press Enter after selecting "DOUBLE" from the Star button choices. The LCD screen will then display the word "DOUBLE" with a flashing three- letter constellation designation after it. Now, select the constellation in which you would like to view a double star. Use the arrow buttons to scroll through the list of constellations. If you are unsure which constellation the three-letter designation represents, refer to Appendix C. Once you have selected the constellation, press Enter. A double star in that constellation will now appear on the LCD screen, along with the guide arrows to lead you to the double star. The current constellation is shown in the lower left, and the double star's name is in the lower right. Note: Double stars typically have names like "Zeta" (Greek letter designation) or a num-ber like "36" (Flamsteed number). The full names for these double stars are actually linked to the constellation they reside in. For example, in the constellation Andromeda, these stars would be "Zeta And" and "36 And." For more information about the double star selected, press the Enter button. (The "S=" now refers to the separation, in arc-seconds, between the double stars. For multiple stars, the "S=" refers to the separation between the two brightest stars. The "M=" now refers to the magnitude of the brightest star.) To go to the next double star in the selected constellation, simply press the up arrow button. The guide arrows will now direct you to the next double star in the constellation. If there are no more double stars available in that constellation, a double star from the next constellation (in alphabetical order) will be displayed. To select another constellation in which to view a double star, press the Star button, select "DOUBLE", and press Enter. Variable Stars Variable stars are stars that change their brightness, also called magnitude, over time. The period of brightness change varies greatly from star to star; some variable stars change brightness over several days while others may take several months to noticeably change. It is fun and challenging to watch a star's magnitude change over time. Observ-ers typically compare the current brightness of the variable star to other stars around it (whose magnitudes are known and do not change over time). To select a variable star to observe, press Enter after selecting "VARIABLE" from the Star button choices. The LCD screen will then display the word "VARIABLE" with a flash-ing three-letter constellation designation after it. Now, select the constellation in which you would like to view a variable star. Use the arrow buttons to scroll through the list of constel-lations. If you are unsure which constellation the three-letter designation represents, refer to Appendix C. Once you have selected the constellation, press Enter. A variable star in that constellation will now appear on the LCD screen, along with the guide arrows to lead you to the variable star. The current constellation is shown in the lower left, and the vari-able star's name is in the lower right. Note: Variable stars typically have names like "Eta" (Greek letter designation) or a let-ter designation like "R." The full names for these variable stars are actually linked to the 17 constellation they reside in. For example, in the constellation Aquila, these stars would be "Eta Aql" and "R Aql." For more information about the variable star selected, press the Enter button. (The "M=" refers to the mean magnitude of the variable star.) To go to the next variable star in the selected constellation, simply press the up arrow button. The guide arrows will now direct you to the next variable star in the constellation. If there are no more variable stars avail-able in that constellation, a variable star from the next constellation (in alphabetical order) will be displayed. To select another constellation in which to view a variable star, press the Star button, select "VARIABLE," and press Enter. Catalog (St) Stars The "ST" catalog contains all of the stars in the IntelliScope Computerized Object Loca-tor's database. This catalog has 837 of the most interesting stars to view in the night sky. The full list of stars appearing in the ST catalog is printed Appendix D. Generally, the best way to use the ST catalog to observe stars is first to peruse Appendix D, and then note the catalog number of the star you wish to observe. To select an ST catalog star to observe, press Enter after selecting "CATALOG" from the Star button choices. The LCD screen will then display the letter "ST" with three digits blinking after it. Now, input the ST catalog number of the star you wish to observe, and press Enter. If the ST catalog number of the star you wish to view contains three digits, it is not necessary to press Enter after inputting the third digit. The object's ST catalog designation will be shown in the upper left corner of the LCD screen, with the guide arrows in the upper right. The lower left will show the constellation the object resides in and the star's name. You can get more information on the star selected by pressing the Enter button. The second line of the LCD screen will then cycle information about the object you are viewing, such as its celestial coordinates (R.A. and Dec.), magnitude (brightness), and a brief description. When you are finished viewing the selected star, you may scroll to another star in the ST catalog by using the arrow buttons, or you can select another ST catalog star to view by pressing the Star button, and pressing Enter once "CATALOG" is selected. 8. tours of the Best Objects The IntelliScope controller offers guided tours of the best and brightest celestial objects visible in the sky each month. There are 12 monthly tours, each consisting of 12 pre-selected objects. The tours are an easy and fun way to locate and observe the finest wonders of the heavens. They are a great place to start for a beginner who is unfamiliar with the night sky, or for a more experienced observer who wants to revisit some old favorites or show friends or family "what's up" on a given evening. Starting a tour To start an IntelliScope tour, press the Tour button at any time after you have aligned the IntelliScope system. The LCD screen will display "SKY TOUR" and a flashing three-letter designation for the month. Scroll through the months by using the arrow buttons until you reach the present month, then press the Enter button. The LCD screen will then display the first tour object for the selected month in the lower right of the screen, with the guide arrows in the upper right. Use the guide arrows to 18 point the telescope, and you will soon be observing the first astronomical showpiece of the month. You can get more information about the current tour object by pressing the Enter button. The second line of the LCD screen will then cycle the following information about the object you are viewing: its celestial co-ordinates (R.A. and Dec.), magnitude (brightness), size (in arc minutes or seconds), and a brief text description. When you have finished viewing the first tour object for the selected month, you can con-tinue the tour by pressing the up arrow button to find the next object. You can exit the tour at any time by pressing any one of the other function buttons on the controller. Since several months' tour objects are visible in the night sky at one time, feel free to select a month before or after the current month. These tour objects will likely be visible also. Remember, however, that viewing objects below 40˚ or so from the horizon will not give the best view due to atmospheric distortion (and usually light pollution). If you are finding that objects in the selected tour month are too close to the horizon, you should choose a month following the selected month, or you can wait a few hours for the objects to rise higher in the sky! 9. the Identify Function There may come a time in your observations when you spot an unidentified deep-sky object or star in the eyepiece and want to know what it is. With the IntelliScope Computer-ized Object Locator, a simple press of a button will tell you. using the ID Button When you locate an object and center it in the eyepiece, you can identify it by simply pressing the ID button. The LCD screen will display "IDENTIFY" with the word "ANY" flashing. You can then use the up/and down arrow buttons to scroll through several more specific options ("STAR", "DOUBLE", "CLUSTER", "NEBULA", and "GALAXY"). If you know which one of these object types you are looking at, selecting the object type will make the identification quicker and more accurate. This is because the computer will search through a shorter list of potential object matches, and will allow proper identifi-cation if there are several objects within the same field of view. If you are unsure of the object type you are looking at, simply select "ANY" from the list of choices. Once you have selected the object type (or "ANY"), press the Enter button. The identity of the object centered in the eyepiece will now be displayed in the lower right area of the LCD screen. The constellation in which the object resides is shown in the lower left. As always, to get more information about the object, press the Enter button. An interesting feature of the ID function is that once initiated, it is continually active. So, if you press the ID button, and choose "STAR", for instance, you can move your telescope from star to star in the sky, and the controller will automatically display the star's identity when you center the star in the eyepiece. This can be a fun and easy way to identify the stars in the sky. In fact, you can even make a "Name That Star" game out of it! Point your finger at a bright star in the sky and see if you can name it. Then, just point the telescope at the star to see if you were correct or not. If the centered star is not in the controller's database, it will display the identity of the closest star that is in its database. To exit the identify function, simply press any other of the controller's function buttons. If you would like to identify another object type, press the ID button again. 19 10. adding user-Defined Objects Not only does the IntelliScope's database contain over 14,000 fascinating objects to view, you can even add your own! Up to 99 user-defined objects can be entered into the database by means of the User button. These user-defined objects can be random stars, a faint object not contained in the controller's database, or just a pretty object that you would like to come back to at some point in the future. To enter a user-defined object into the database, you must have the right ascension (R.A.) and declination (Dec.) coordinates for the object. If you are currently observing an object that is not in the controller's database and you wish to add it, but don't know its coordi-nates, you can use the FCN button to obtain its coordinates (described in next section). To input a user-defined object, begin by pressing the User button. The LCD screen will display the word "NEW" with a two-digit number flashing after it. Since no user-defined objects currently exist, press Enter to create user-defined ("NEW") object number 01. The LCD will display the R.A. and Dec. coordinates for the "NEW" object selected in the lower left. Since no data has been input yet, these coordinates will be 00:00 +00.0. The first four digits indicate the R.A. coordinate (in R.A. hours and minutes), and the remain-ing digits (and the ± sign) indicate the Dec. coordinate (in degrees). Now, press the Enter button, and the first two digits of the R.A. coordinate (R.A. hours) will begin flashing. Press the two numerical buttons on the keypad that correspond the hours value of the R.A. coordinate. If the value of the R.A. hours is less than 10, make sure to enter a zero first. Then the second two digits of the R.A. coordinate (R.A. minutes) will begin flashing. Press the two numerical buttons that correspond to the minutes value of the R.A. coordi-nate. If the R.A. minutes are less than 10, make sure to enter a zero first. Next, the sign of the Dec. coordinate will be flashing. Use the arrow buttons to select "+" or "-"for the Dec. coordinate. Then, the first two digits of the Dec. coordinate will begin flashing. Press the two numerical buttons that correspond to the degrees value of the Dec. coordinate. Then the tenth of a degree value for the Dec coordinate will begin flashing. Press the numerical button that corresponds to the tenths of a degree value for the Dec. coordinate. You have now input the data for your first user-defined object. Remember that this object is now "NEW01". If you wish to view this object in the future, press the User button, and press Enter once "NEW01" is selected. The guide arrows will then tell you where to point your telescope to find the user-defined object. If you wish to input another user-defined object, select "NEW02" (by using numerical but-tons or the arrow buttons) after pressing the User button and input the data as outlined previously. If you select a "NEW" object number that you have already entered coordi-nates for and attempt to input new data, you will lose the data that was input previously. You may find it convenient to keep a written log of the "NEW" objects so that you can easily keep track of them. 11. the FCn Button The IntelliScope Computerized Object Locator has several other useful functions, a couple of which can be accessed by using the FCN (function) button. r.a. and Dec. Coordinates By simply pressing the FCN button, the controller will give a continuous readout of the telescope's current R.A. and Dec. coordinates. This can be helpful and powerful in 20 a number of ways. You can easily find any object in the night sky if you know its right ascension and declination coordinates. Grab any star atlas, choose any object you wish to view, be it faint galaxy or random star, and jot down its coordinates. Then, once you have aligned the IntelliScope system, you can point the telescope to that location by simply pressing the FCN button and moving the telescope until the R.A. and Dec. coor-dinates displayed match the coordinates of the object you wish to view. You can also press the FCN button at any time to display the current R.A. and Dec. coordinates of whatever you are currently viewing. A common use for the FCN button is to locate "transient" objects, such as comets and asteroids. To find these objects you will need to learn their coordinates from astronomy resources, such as Astronomy, Sky & Telescope, or a reliable astronomy website. Comet and asteroid positions will change from night to night, so entering the current coordinates into the user-defined database is generally not useful. After pressing the FCN button, the R.A. and Dec. coordinates corresponding to the cen-ter of the telescope's field of view are displayed on the first line of the LCD screen. The lower left of the screen indicates the current constellation the telescope is pointing to. The lower right numbers are the current azimuth ("AZ") and altitude ("ALT") coordinates of the telescope; this information is generally not useful. the realignment Function This function is useful for obtaining a new alignment fix during an observing session to correct for small pointing errors. Use this function only when pointing accuracy for a certain area of the sky appears to be poor compared to other areas of the sky. This is evident when objects in one area of the sky consistently fall at the edge or just outside the field of view (of the 25mm eyepiece) when the numbers on the LCD screen read 0.0 0.0. This can happen if the alignment stars initially chosen during setup are somewhat close to each other (less than 60˚ apart) or if the area of sky being viewed is a considerable distance away from the alignment stars chosen. To improve pointing accuracy in a specific area of the sky, select an object in the locator's database from that region, and use the guide arrows to find the object. Precisely center the object in the eyepiece (preferably a high-powered one). Now, press the FCN button, and the R.A. and Dec. coordinates of the centered object will be displayed. Then, press the Enter button. The LCD screen will now display "ALIGN OBJECT 3" on the first line, and will be flashing the object currently centered in the telescope on the second line. Pressing Enter again then realigns the IntelliScope system to the object centered in the telescope. The LCD screen will display a new "warp factor" associated with the new alignment. If this number is greater than ±0.5, you may want to consider resetting the controller to perform another two-star alignment. Turn the controller off, then on again (with the Power button), to do this. If, instead of pressing Enter a second time after pressing the FCN button, you press one of the arrow buttons, the list of initial setup alignment stars will be displayed. If you wish, you can select one of these alignment stars to realign on. Do this by scrolling to the desired alignment star using the arrow buttons, center the star in the telescope, and press Enter. In general, it will not be necessary to use the realignment function, but it is a handy feature to have at your disposal. Also, be aware that while pointing accuracy will increase in the area of sky around the object realigned on, it may decrease in other areas of the sky. 21 12. the "Hidden" Functions All of the active functions of the IntelliScope Computerized Object Locator have been outlined. There are, however, some additional "hidden" functions that may be of some use to you. To access the hidden functions, press the Enter button while pressing the Power button to turn the controller on. The LCD will display its introduction screen (with software version number) and then show the words "ALT AZM TEST." This is the first hid-den function. Scroll to the other hidden functions by using the arrow buttons. The other hidden functions are "ENCODER TEST," "DOWNLOAD," "CHECKSUM," "REWRITE," and "CLOCK." When the hidden function you wish to use is displayed, press Enter to select it. To exit the currently chosen hidden function, press any button except for the Enter or arrow buttons. To completely exit the hidden functions section of the controller, you will need to hold the Power button down until the controller turns off. The rest of this section gives the details and purpose of each hidden function. altitude and azimuth test The altitude and azimuth test ("ALT AZM TEST") is a diagnostic test that gives relative altitude and azimuth positions for the telescope. This test will allow you to easily see if the encoders are "talking" to the controller, and if the encoders are accurately monitoring the telescope's motions. To effectively use this test, make sure the telescope optical tube is in the horizontal position when pressing the Enter and Power buttons to access the hidden functions. Once "ALT AZM TEST" is chosen from the hidden function options, the LCD screen will display the telescope's current relative altitude and azimuth position (in degrees); the relative altitude is in the upper right, while the relative azimuth is in the lower right. To begin with, both of these numbers will be +000.0. The first two sets of numbers on the upper and lower lines of the LCD screen are meaningless for the purposes of this test. If you move the telescope counter-clockwise in azimuth, the number in the lower right should increase, while if you move clockwise in azimuth, the number will decrease. If you rotate the telescope exactly 360˚ in azimuth, the readout should return to the original +000.0 reading. If you move the telescope upwards in altitude, the number in the upper right should increase, while if you move downwards in altitude, the number will decrease. If the telescope tube was perfectly horizontal when you enabled the hidden functions of the controller, then the altitude will read +090.0 when the telescope is pointed precisely vertical. If one, or both, of the encoders are not behaving properly when performing this diag-nostic test, there may be a problem with the assembly of the system, or a problem with one of the encoder boards or discs. Also, be sure to check that all cable connections are secure. Encoder test The encoder test is another diagnostic test that gives information about the performance of the encoders themselves. Select "ENCODER TEST" from the list of hidden functions using the arrow buttons and press Enter. The LCD screen will now display two lines of data. The top line of data corresponds to the altitude encoder, while the lower line of data corresponds to the azimuth encoder. The first two digits on each line denote the amplitude of the signal from one of the magnetic sensors on the encoder board, the second two digits represent the amplitude from the 22 other sensor on the encoder board. The numbers are in hexadecimal (base 16) digits. Therefore "A" in hexadecimal represents "11" in decimal, "B" represents "12" in decimal, "C" represents "13," "D" represents "14," "E" represents "15," and "F" represents "16." When moving the telescope in altitude or azimuth, you will note that each of the digit pairs rises and falls. None of the digit pairs should ever go above "F3." If they do, then the encoder disk is too close to the sensors on the encoder board. This will generally not happen in altitude, but can happen in azimuth. If you notice that the first or second digit pair on the second line of the display goes above "F3," then try loosening the lock nut on the azimuth nut of the base by about 1/16 turn. If this does not work, you will need to disassemble the azimuth encoder (azimuth encoder disk, brass bushing, and azimuth encoder board) and reassemble it carefully according to the instructions that came with the IntelliScope Dobsonian telescope itself. If you notice that the two digit pairs on the first line are going above "F3," then there is a problem with your altitude encoder assembly. More than likely, the altitude encoder disk is bent. The three-digit number displayed after the digit pairs on each line is the "radius" for each encoder. This number should not go above about 125 or below about 30. If it does, per-formance may be compromised for the corresponding encoder. If the number goes above 125, then the encoder disk and magnet may be too close to each other. If the number goes below 30, then the encoder disk and magnet may be too far away from each other. Also, if the radius varies by more than 30 counts in a cycle, encoder performance may not be optimal, and you should contact Orion's Customer Service Department. The four-digit number at the end of each line is the raw encoder "ticks" in hexadecimal numbers. This information will generally not be useful for diagnostic testing of the encoders. Download This function allows downloading of software changes and upgrades available from Orion's website. To use this option, you must have the optional IntelliScope-to-PC cable, available from Orion. Check www.oriontelescopes.com for more information about avail-able software downloads for the IntelliScope Computerized Object Locator. Checksum The checksum function is used to make sure that software has loaded into the control-ler properly. It has no purpose until a new software version is downloaded. Check the IntelliScope download section on www.telescope.com to see what the proper checksum should be for each new software version. rewrite Rewrite is also only used after a new software version has been downloaded. It rewrites the new software into its memory in order to prevent any potential problems from arising after the software transfer. Clock This function allows use of the IntelliScope system with equatorial platforms for Dobsonian telescopes. If you are using your IntelliScope with a Dobsonian equatorial platform, press Enter when the selection "CLOCK" is displayed from the available "hid-den" function choices. The LCD screen will then show the word "ON" blinking. For normal operation of the IntelliScope system, the controller's internal clock should be on. For use with a Dobsonian equatorial platform, use the up or down arrow button to change "ON" to 23 "OFF," and press Enter. The controller is now ready to be used with a Dobsonian equato-rial platform. Now, when you press Power to turn the controller on, the LCD screen will state "CLOCK IS OFF" on the second line of its introduction screen. To turn the controller's internal clock back on, access the hidden functions, select "CLOCK," press Enter, change the "OFF" back to "ON," and press Enter again. 13. Specifications Objects in database: • 110 Messier objects • 7840 New General Catalog objects • 5386 Index Catalog objects • 8 Major planets (including Pluto) • 99 User-defined objects Computer interface: RS-232 port Power: Requires one 9V battery This device complies with Part 15 of the FCC Rules. Operation is subject to the following two conditions: (1) this device nay not cause harmful interference, and (2) this device must accept any interference received, including interference that may cause undesired operation. Changes of modifications not expressly approved by the party responsible for compliance could void the user's authority to operate the equipment. Note: This equipment has been tested and found to comply with the limits for a Class B digital device, pursuant to Part 15 of the FCC Rules. These limits are designed to pro-vide reasonable protection against harmful interference in a residential installation. This equipment generates, uses and can radiate radio frequency energy and, if not installed and used in accordance with the instructions, may cause harmful interference to radio communications. However, there is no guarantee that interference will not occur in a particular installation. If this equipment does cause harmful interference to radio or televi-sion reception, which can be determined by turning the equipment off and on, the user is encouraged to try to correct the interference by one or more of the following measures: • Reorient or relocate the receiving antenna. • Increase the separation between the equipment and receiver. • Connect the equipment into an output on a circuit different from that to which the receiver is connected. • Consult the dealer or an experienced radio/TV technician for help. • A shielded cable must be used when connecting a peripheral to the serial ports. 24 appendix a: troubleshooting the IntelliScope System This section is intended to help you if you are encountering any problems with your Intel-liScope system. If this information is not useful to you in determining the source of the problem, contact Orion Technical Support via phone or email. azimuth encoder, in general 1. Is the azimuth axis screw's hex lock nut tight enough? Is it too tight? Remember, it should be tightened only 1/4 turn past when the fender washer is no longer loose under the nut. 2. Does the brass bushing extend slightly above the top surface of the top baseplate? If not, the bushing or top baseplate may need replacement, or there may be an assem-bly problem. 3. Is the azimuth encoder disk (magnet) bent? If so, you will need to flatten it by bending. 4. Is the azimuth encoder board trimmed flush on the side in contact with the top base-plate? If not, the board will not seat flat against the baseplate and this may cause the encoder's sensors to come too close to the encoder disk. 5. Is the brass bushing properly registered with the azimuth encoder disk? The feature on the front of the bushing needs to seat into the hole in the disk. altitude encoder, in general 6. Is the altitude encoder disk significantly bent? If so, the altitude encoder assembly will need replacement. Also, if the altitude encoder mounting screws are loose, there is an increased chance of the user bending the altitude encoder disk. Warp factor consistently above ±0.5 but below ±2.0 7. Check accuracy of vertical stop. Use a carpenter's level to do this. 8. Are alignment stars being centered with reasonable precision? A high-power eye-piece (at least 10mm focal length), or an illuminated reticle eyepiece (preferred) is recommended. 9. Check encoders as outlined previously. 10. Try to use alignment stars that are well above the horizon. Light from stars is refracted as it travels through the atmosphere and starlight near the horizon has to travel through the greatest amount of atmosphere before reaching your telescope. Stars near the horizon can appear as much as 2° away from their actual position. 11. Avoid long delays between aligning on the first and second alignment stars. The stars in the night sky appear to move due to the rotation of the Earth. If you take more than a few minutes to align on the second star, this stellar motion will result in an increase in the warp factor (and decrease the resultant pointing accuracy). This is because the controller does not yet have a frame of reference to tell which way the stars should appear to be moving before the second star is aligned on. Warp numbers larger than 2.0 12. Are the stars you aligned on actually the stars you selected on the controller? Consult the finder charts in Appendix B if you are unsure. 25 13. The encoder sensors may be coming into contact with the encoder disks. Check both the altitude and azimuth encoders as outlined above. altitude readouts do not change when you move the scope (during "aLt aZM tESt") 14. Check the altitude cable's connections. 15. Make sure the knob that goes through the altitude encoder is tight. 16. Check that the altitude encoder disk rotates as the telescope tube is moved up or down. If it doesn't, then either you need to tighten the retaining knob more, or the encoder is too tight on the encoder board itself (a manufacturing defect), in which case it will need to be replaced. azimuth readouts do not change when you move the scope (during "aLt aZM tESt") 17. Check the azimuth cable's connections. 18. Make sure the hex lock nut on the azimuth axis screw is tight. The fender washer underneath the hex lock nut should not be able to move. Remember, the hex lock nut should be tightened about 3/16 to 1/4 turn beyond the point where the washer cannot move any longer. 19. Try disassembling then reassembling the azimuth encoder by disassembling the top and bottom groundboards of the base. If you need to contact Orion Technical Support, email support@telescope.com or call (800) 676-1343. 26 27 NORTH W IL TI RI ON 20 00 SOUTH W E S TEA S T LIBRA LYRA Deneb Vega Spica A rcturus PU PP IS VELA VIRGO LEO Denebola R asalhague Re gu lu s Si riu s LY N X Mi rfa k PE RS EU S MO NO CE RO S B O Ö TE S URSA MINOR CEPHEUS CASSIOP EIA CA ME LOP ARD ALIS G E M IN I HYDRA HY DR A PY XIS ANT LIA C A N IS M IN O R DRACO Big Dipper TA U R U S B et el ge us e LittleDipper Po in te rs Polaris U R SA M AJ OR C as to r C ap el la Pr oc yo n CYGNUS LE O M IN O R H ER C U LES O P H IU C H U S SCORPIUS CENTAURUS CA NC ER SEXT AN S CRATER Alp har d CORVUS Mizar O R IO N C O R O N A B O R EA LIS SE R P E N S C A P U T C A N E S V E N A TIC I Keystone COMA BERENICES SPRING Early March 1:00 AM Late March 12:00 AM Early April 12:00 AM* Late April 11:00 PM* Early May 10:00 PM* Late May 9:00 PM* Early June 8:00 PM (dusk)* *Daylight saving time appendix B: alignment Star Finder Charts 28 W IL TI RI ON 20 00 SOUTH W E S T NORTH E A S T Pointers Great Square of Pegasus Teapot LUP US Antare s A lbireo Altair LYRA Mirfak Alpheratz D eneb Vega Sp ic a VI R G O LE O LYNX PERSEUS LACERTA B O Ö TE S URSA MINOR CEPHEUS CASSIOPEIA ANDROMEDA CAMELOPARDALIS LIB RA DRA CO M iz ar D en eb ol a Bi g D ipp er Little Dipper Polaris UR SA MA JO R C O M A B E R E N IC E S C Y G N U S PIS C E S PISCES P E G A S U S LE O MI NO R HERCU LES OPHIUCHUS SCORPIU S TELESCOPIUM C O R O N A BO R EA LI S SE RP EN S CA PU T SERPENS CAUDA CORONAAUSTRALIS Rasalhague C A NE S VE N AT IC I SAG ITTA AQUILA SCUTUM A rc tu ru s E Q U U LEU S D ELPH INUS CAPRICORNUS MICROSCOPIUM A Q UA R IU S SAGITTARIUS VULPECULA Keystone SUMMER Early June 2:00 AM* Late June 1:00 AM* Early July 12:00 AM* Late July 11:00 PM* Early August 10:00 PM* Late August 9:00 PM* Early September 8:00 PM (dusk)* *Daylight saving time 29 AUTUMN Early September 2:00 AM* Late September 1:00 AM* Early October 12:00 AM* Late October 11:00 PM* Early November 9:00 PM Late November 8:00 PM Early December 7:00 PM *Daylight saving time W IL TI RI ON 20 00 SOUTH W E S T NORTH E A S T Pointers Keystone O R IO N FORNAX CETUS GRUS LYNX LY R A AQ UI LA SC U TU M SE R PE N S C A U D A PISCES EQ UU LE US PE R S E U S PE GA SU S LA C E R TA SCULPTOR ERIDANUS PHOENIX PISCIS A USTR INUS CA PR ICO RN US MIC RO SC OP IUM AQUARIUS O P H IU C H U S V U LP E C U LA SA G IT TA H ER C UL ES URSA MINOR CEP HEUS CASSIOPEIA CAMELOPARDALIS GEM INI DRA CO Algol H yades Great Square of Pegasus Big Dip per Ve ga R os al ha gu e A lta ir TA U R U S A ldebaran B etelgeuse A R IE S TR IA N G U LU M Fomalh aut D en eb A lb ire o Little Dipper Polaris URSAMAJOR Capella M irfak Alpheratz Mizar A N D RO M EDA DE LP H IN U S SA GI TT AR IU S C Y G N U S 30 WINTER Early December 2:00 AM Late December 1:00 AM Early January 12:00 AM Late January 11:00 PM Early February 10:00 PM Late February 9:00 PM Early March 8:00 PM NORTH W IL TI RI ON 20 00 SOUTH W E S TEA S T Gre at S qua re o f Pe gas us PUPPISVELA V IR G O CANES VENATICI LEO R egulus Adhara Sirius FO RN AX C ET U S LYNX P IS C E S P E R S E U S PE G AS US LA CE RT A ER ID AN USMONOCEROS Alphard LEP US COLUM BA CAE LUM BOÖTES URSA MINOR CEPH EUS CA SS IOP EIA CA MEL OPARD ALIS GEMINI Mi rfa k HYDRA PYXISANTLIA MINOR CANIS MAJOR CANIS DRACO Al go l Rige l M ira H ya de s Big Dipper TA UR US Al de ba ra n Betelgeu se A R IE S TR IA N G U LU M LittleDipper Polaris URSA M AJO R B ER EN IC ES C O M A C astor Ca pe lla Pollux Procyon Al ph er at z AN DR OM ED A CYGN US LEO M IN O R HERCULES C A N C ER SEXTANS C R ATER D enebola Mizar OR ION Po inte rs 31 And Andromeda Ant Antlia Aps Apus Aql Aquila Aqr Aquarius Ara Ara Ari Aries Aur Auriga Boo Boötes Cae Caelum Cam Camelopardalis Cap Capricorn Car Carina Cas Cassiopeia Cen Centaurus Cep Cepheus Cet Cetus Cha Chamaeleon Cir Circinus Cnc Cancer CMa Canis Major CMi Canis Minor Col Columba Com Coma Berenices CrA Corona Australis CrB Corona Borealis Crt Crater Cru Crux Crv Corvus CVn Canes Venatici Cyg Cygnus Del Delphinus Dor Dorado Dra Draco Equ Equuleus Eri Eridanus For Fornax Gem Gemini Gru Grus Her Hercules Hor Horologium Hya Hydra Hyi Hydrus Ind Indus Lac Lacerta Leo Leo Lep Lepus Lib Libra LMi Leo Minor Lup Lupus Lyn Lynx Lyr Lyra Men Mensa Mic Microscopium Mon Monoceros Mus Musca Nor Norma Oct Octans Oph Ophiuchus Ori Orion Pav Pavo Peg Pegasus Per Perseus Phe Phoenix Pic Pictor PsA Piscis Austrinus Psc Pisces Pup Puppis Pyx Pyxis Ret Reticulum Scl Sculptor Sco Scorpius Sct Scutum Ser Serpens Sex Sextans Sge Sagitta Sgr Sagittarius Tau Taurus Tel Telescopium TrA Triangulm Australe Tri Triangulum Tuc Tucana UMa Ursa Major UMi Ursa Minor Vel Vela Vir Virgo Vol Volans Vul Vulpecula appendix C: Constellation abbreviations 32 a p p e n d ix D : S t C a ta lo g N um be r N am e O th er R A D ec M ag Se p Co n Co de S T 0 0 1 O ∑ ∑ 2 5 4 0 0 0 1 .2 + 6 0 2 1 7 .6 5 9 " C a s 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 0 0 2 3 0 0 0 0 2 .0 -0 6 .0 4 .4 * P sc 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 0 0 3 ∑ 3 0 5 3 0 0 0 2 .6 + 6 6 0 6 5 .9 1 5 " C a s 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 0 0 4 S U 0 0 0 4 .6 + 4 3 .5 8 * A n d 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 0 0 5 C e d 2 1 4 0 0 0 4 .7 + 6 7 .2 7 .8 3 0 ' C e p 1 3 0 e m is si o n n e b u la S T 0 0 6 ∑ 3 0 6 2 A D S 6 1 0 0 0 6 .3 + 5 8 .4 6 .4 1 .5 " C a s 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 0 0 7 A lp h e ra tz A lp h a 0 0 0 8 .4 + 2 9 0 5 2 .1 * A n d 2 1 st a r S T 0 0 8 ∑ 2 A D S 1 0 2 0 0 0 9 .3 + 7 9 .7 6 .6 0 .8 " C e p 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 0 0 9 K a p p a ß 3 9 1 0 0 0 9 .4 -2 8 0 0 6 .2 2 " S cl 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 0 1 0 A lg e n ib G a m m a 0 0 1 3 .2 + 1 5 .2 2 .8 * P e g 2 1 st a r S T 0 1 1 A D A D S 1 8 0 0 0 1 4 .5 -0 7 .8 4 .9 1 .5 ° C e t 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 0 1 2 7 0 0 1 4 .6 -1 8 .9 4 .4 * C e t 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 0 1 3 ∑ 1 2 "3 5 , U U " 0 0 1 5 .0 + 0 8 4 9 5 .8 1 2 " P sc 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 0 1 4 S 0 0 1 5 .4 -3 2 .1 5 .5 * S cl 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 0 1 5 ∑ 1 3 0 0 1 6 .2 + 7 6 .9 7 0 .9 " C e p 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 0 1 6 S T 0 0 1 7 .6 + 5 0 .3 9 * C a s 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 0 1 7 G ro o m b ri d g e 3 4 A D S 2 4 6 0 0 1 8 .1 + 4 4 .0 8 3 9 " A n d 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 0 1 8 ∑ 2 4 0 0 1 8 .5 + 2 6 0 8 7 .6 5 " A n d 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 0 1 9 Io ta 0 0 1 9 .4 -0 8 .8 3 .5 * C e t 2 1 st a r S T 0 2 0 V X 0 0 1 9 .9 + 4 4 .7 8 * A n d 2 1 st a r S T 0 2 1 R 0 0 2 4 .0 + 3 8 3 5 5 .8 S te lla r A n d 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 0 2 2 ∑ 3 0 0 0 2 7 .2 + 4 9 5 9 6 .9 1 5 " C a s 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 0 2 3 A Q 0 0 2 7 .6 + 3 5 .6 6 .9 * A n d 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 0 2 4 B e ta L a ca ill e 1 1 9 0 0 3 1 .5 -6 3 .0 4 .4 2 7 " Tu c 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 0 2 5 ∑ 3 6 A D S 4 4 9 0 0 3 2 .4 + 0 6 .9 5 .7 2 8 " P sc 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 0 2 6 Z e ta 1 7 0 0 3 7 .0 + 5 3 .9 3 .7 * C a s 2 1 st a r S T 0 2 7 D e lt a 0 0 3 9 .3 + 3 0 .9 3 .3 * A n d 2 1 st a r S T 0 2 8 5 5 0 0 3 9 .9 + 2 1 2 6 5 .4 6 " P sc 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 0 2 9 S ch e d a r A lp h a 0 0 4 0 .5 + 5 6 .5 2 .2 * C a s 2 1 st a r S T 0 3 0 O ∑ 1 8 A D S 5 8 8 0 0 4 2 .4 + 0 4 .2 7 .8 1 .5 " P sc 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 0 3 1 H N 1 2 2 A D S 6 2 4 0 0 4 5 .7 + 7 5 .0 5 .7 3 6 " C a s 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 0 3 2 D e lt a 0 0 4 8 .7 + 0 7 .6 4 .4 * P sc 2 1 st a r S T 0 3 3 E ta 0 0 4 9 .1 + 5 7 4 9 3 .4 1 2 " C a s 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 0 3 4 6 5 A D S 6 8 3 0 0 4 9 .9 + 2 7 .7 6 .3 4 .4 " P sc 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 0 3 5 D o 1 3 0 0 5 0 .0 + 6 4 .1 1 1 1 3 ' C a s 1 2 0 sc a tt e re d g ro u p o f st a rs S T 0 3 6 L a m b d a 1 D u n lo p 2 0 0 5 2 .4 -6 9 .5 6 .5 2 1 " Tu c 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 0 3 7 3 6 A D S 7 5 5 0 0 5 5 .0 + 2 3 .6 6 0 .8 " A n d 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 0 3 8 N a vi "G a m m a , T si h " 0 0 5 6 .7 + 6 0 .7 2 .5 * C a s 2 1 st a r S T 0 3 9 ∑ 8 0 0 0 5 9 .4 + 0 0 4 7 8 .4 2 6 " C e t 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 0 4 0 ∑ 7 9 0 1 0 0 .1 + 4 4 4 3 6 8 " A n d 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 0 4 1 U 0 1 0 2 .3 + 8 1 5 1 6 .8 S te lla r C e p 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 0 4 2 ∑ 8 8 7 4 0 1 0 5 .6 + 2 1 2 8 5 .3 3 0 " P sc 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 0 4 3 ∑ 9 0 7 7 0 1 0 5 .8 + 0 4 5 5 6 .8 3 3 " P sc 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 0 4 4 Z e ta R u m ke r 2 0 1 0 8 .4 -5 5 .3 3 .9 6 .4 " P h e 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 0 4 5 E ta 0 1 0 8 .6 -1 0 .2 3 .5 * C e t 2 1 st a r S T 0 4 6 L u x Ly d ia e S A O 1 8 1 0 1 0 8 .7 + 8 6 .3 4 .3 * C e p 2 1 st a r S T 0 4 7 M ir a ch B e ta 0 1 0 9 .7 + 3 5 .6 2 * A n d 2 1 st a r S T 0 4 8 Z e ta A D S 9 9 6 0 1 1 3 .7 + 0 7 .6 5 .6 2 3 " P sc 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 0 4 9 K a p p a h 3 4 2 3 0 1 1 5 .8 -6 8 .9 5 .1 5 .4 " Tu c 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 0 5 0 Z 0 1 1 6 .2 + 2 5 .8 8 .8 * P sc 2 1 st a r S T 0 5 1 ∑ 1 1 3 4 2 0 1 1 9 .8 -0 0 3 1 6 .4 1 .6 " C e t 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 0 5 2 P si A D S 1 1 2 9 0 1 2 5 .9 + 6 8 .1 4 .7 2 5 " C a s 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 0 5 3 R 0 1 2 7 .0 -3 2 .5 6 .1 * S cl 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 0 5 4 G a m m a 0 1 2 8 .4 -4 3 .3 3 .4 4 ' P h e 2 1 st a r S T 0 5 5 A ch e rn a r A lp h a 0 1 3 7 .7 -5 7 1 4 0 .5 * E ri 2 1 st a r S T 0 5 6 5 1 0 1 3 8 .0 + 4 8 .6 3 .6 * A n d 2 1 st a r S T 0 5 7 U V 0 1 3 8 .8 -1 8 .0 7 * C e t 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 0 5 8 p D u n lo p 5 0 1 3 9 .8 -5 6 .2 5 .8 1 1 .5 " E ri 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 0 5 9 N u 1 0 6 0 1 4 1 .4 + 0 5 .5 4 .4 * P sc 2 1 st a r S T 0 6 0 4 4 B u rn h a m 1 1 0 3 0 1 4 3 .3 + 6 0 .6 5 .8 1 .6 " C a s 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 0 6 1 P h i 0 1 4 3 .7 + 5 0 .7 4 .1 * P e r 2 1 st a r S T 0 6 2 ∑ 1 6 2 0 1 4 9 .3 + 4 7 5 4 5 .8 2 " P e r 8 tr ip le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 0 6 3 ∑ 1 7 4 1 0 1 5 0 .1 + 2 2 .3 6 2 .6 " A ri 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 0 6 4 ∑ 1 6 3 0 1 5 1 .3 + 6 4 5 1 6 .6 3 5 " C a s 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 0 6 5 B a te n K a it o s Z e ta 0 1 5 1 .5 -1 0 .3 3 .7 3 ' C e t 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 0 6 6 ∑ 1 7 8 0 1 5 2 .0 + 1 0 4 8 8 .5 3 " A ri 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 0 6 7 ∑ 1 8 0 G a m m a 0 1 5 3 .5 + 1 9 .3 4 .5 8 " A ri 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 0 6 8 P si 0 1 5 3 .6 -4 6 .3 4 .4 5 ° P h e 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 0 6 9 E p si lo n 4 5 0 1 5 4 .4 + 6 3 .7 3 .4 * C a s 2 1 st a r S T 0 7 0 ∑ 1 8 6 A D S 1 5 3 8 0 1 5 5 .9 + 0 1 .9 6 .8 1 " C e t 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 0 7 1 5 6 A D S 1 5 3 4 0 1 5 6 .2 + 3 7 .3 5 .7 3 ' A n d 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 0 7 2 L a m b d a A D S 1 5 6 3 0 1 5 7 .9 + 2 3 .6 4 .8 3 7 " A ri 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 0 7 3 U p si lo n 0 2 0 0 .0 -2 1 .1 4 * C e t 2 1 st a r S T 0 7 4 ∑ 2 0 2 A lp h a 0 2 0 2 .0 + 0 2 .8 4 1 .6 " P sc 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 0 7 5 A lm a ch G a m m a 0 2 0 3 .9 + 4 2 .3 2 .2 1 0 " A n d 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 0 7 6 H a m a l A lp h a 0 2 0 7 .2 + 2 3 .5 2 * A ri 2 1 st a r S T 0 7 7 5 9 0 2 1 0 .9 + 3 9 0 2 5 .6 1 6 " A n d 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 0 7 8 Io ta A D S 1 6 9 7 0 2 1 2 .4 + 3 0 .3 5 3 .8 " Tr i 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 0 7 9 ∑ 2 3 1 6 6 0 2 1 2 .8 -0 2 .4 5 .7 1 6 .5 " C e t 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 0 8 0 ∑ 2 2 8 A D S 1 7 0 9 0 2 1 4 .0 + 4 7 .5 6 .6 1 .1 " A n d 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 0 8 1 ∑ 2 3 2 0 2 1 4 .7 + 3 0 2 4 8 7 " Tr i 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 0 8 2 ∑ 2 3 9 0 2 1 7 .4 + 2 8 4 4 7 1 4 " Tr i 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 0 8 3 M ir a O m ic ro n 0 2 1 9 .3 -0 3 .0 2 * C e t 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 0 8 4 Io ta 0 2 2 9 .1 + 6 7 .4 4 2 .2 " C a s 6 tr ip le s ta r S T 0 8 5 ∑ 2 6 8 0 2 2 9 .4 + 5 5 3 1 6 .9 3 " P e r 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 0 8 6 ∑ 2 7 4 0 2 3 1 .5 + 0 1 0 5 7 .3 1 4 " C e t 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 0 8 7 P o la ri s A lp h a 0 2 3 1 .8 + 8 9 1 6 2 1 8 " U M i 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 0 8 8 O m e g a h 3 5 0 6 0 2 3 3 .9 -2 8 1 3 5 1 1 " F o r 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 0 8 9 3 0 0 2 3 7 .0 + 2 4 3 8 6 .5 3 9 " A ri 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 0 9 0 R R T R I 0 2 3 7 .0 + 3 4 .3 5 .4 * Tr i 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 0 9 1 ∑ 2 9 9 G a m m a 0 2 4 3 .3 + 0 3 .2 3 .6 2 .7 " C e t 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 0 9 2 ∑ 3 0 5 0 2 4 7 .5 + 1 9 2 2 7 .4 3 " A ri 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 0 9 3 R Z 0 2 4 8 .9 + 6 9 3 8 6 .2 S te lla r C a s 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 0 9 4 p i 0 2 4 9 .3 + 1 7 2 8 5 .2 3 " A ri 6 tr ip le s ta r S T 0 9 5 ∑ 3 0 7 E ta 0 2 5 0 .7 + 5 5 5 3 3 .9 2 8 " P e r 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 0 9 6 R 0 2 5 3 .9 -4 9 .9 4 .7 * H o r 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 0 9 7 ∑ 3 3 0 A D S 2 2 3 7 0 2 5 7 .2 -0 0 .6 7 .3 9 " C e t 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 0 9 8 A ca m a r T h e ta 0 2 5 8 .3 -4 0 .3 3 .5 8 " E ri 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 0 9 9 ∑ 3 3 3 E p si lo n 0 2 5 9 .2 + 2 9 .3 4 .6 1 .4 " A ri 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 1 0 0 E p si lo n 0 2 5 9 .2 + 2 1 2 0 4 .6 1 " A ri 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 1 0 1 ∑ 3 3 1 0 3 0 0 .8 + 5 2 2 0 5 .4 1 2 " P e r 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 1 0 2 M e n ka r A lp h a 0 3 0 2 .3 + 0 4 .1 2 .5 * C e t 2 1 st a r S T 1 0 3 R h o 2 5 0 3 0 5 .2 + 3 8 .8 3 .4 * P e r 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 1 0 4 ∑ 3 2 0 0 3 0 6 .2 + 7 9 2 4 5 .8 5 " C e p 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 1 0 5 h 3 5 6 8 0 3 0 7 .5 -7 9 .0 5 .6 1 5 " H yi 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 1 0 6 A lg o l B e ta 0 3 0 8 .2 + 4 1 .0 2 .2 * P e r 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 1 0 7 A lp h a A D S 2 4 0 2 0 3 1 2 .1 -2 9 .0 4 5 " F o r 2 d o u b le s ta r 33 N um be r N am e O th er R A D ec M ag Se p Co n Co de S T 1 0 8 h 3 5 5 6 0 3 1 2 .4 -4 4 .4 6 3 .5 " E ri 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 1 0 9 ∑ 3 6 2 0 3 1 6 .3 + 6 0 0 2 8 .5 7 " C a m 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 1 1 0 ∑ 3 6 9 0 3 1 7 .2 + 4 0 2 9 6 .7 3 " P e r 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 1 1 1 A D S 2 4 4 6 0 3 1 7 .7 + 3 8 .6 7 .8 0 .9 " P e r 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 1 1 2 Z e ta 0 3 1 8 .2 -6 2 .5 5 .2 5 " R e t 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 1 1 3 Ta u 4 A D S 2 4 7 2 0 3 1 9 .5 -2 1 .8 3 .7 * E ri 2 1 st a r S T 1 1 4 To m s To p a z S A O 7 5 8 7 1 0 3 2 0 .3 + 2 9 .0 4 .5 9 ° A ri 2 1 st a r S T 1 1 5 M ir fa k A lp h a 0 3 2 4 .3 + 4 9 5 2 1 .8 * P e r 2 1 st a r S T 1 1 6 Y 0 3 2 7 .7 + 4 4 .2 8 .1 * P e r 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 1 1 7 ∑ 3 9 4 0 3 2 8 .0 + 2 0 2 7 7 .1 7 " A ri 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 1 1 8 ∑ 3 8 5 A D S 2 5 4 4 0 3 2 9 .1 + 5 9 .9 4 .2 2 .4 " C a m 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 1 1 9 ∑ 3 8 9 0 3 3 0 .1 + 5 9 2 1 6 .5 2 .7 " C a m 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 1 2 0 S ig m a 0 3 3 0 .6 + 4 8 .0 4 .4 * P e r 2 1 st a r S T 1 2 1 ∑ 4 0 1 0 3 3 1 .3 + 2 7 3 4 6 .4 1 1 " Ta u 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 1 2 2 E p si lo n 0 3 3 2 .9 -0 9 .5 3 .7 * E ri 2 1 st a r S T 1 2 3 ∑ 4 0 0 A D S 2 6 1 2 0 3 3 5 .0 + 6 0 .0 6 .8 1 .4 " C a m 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 1 2 4 O ∑ 3 6 A D S 2 6 5 0 0 3 4 0 .0 + 6 3 .9 6 .8 4 6 " C a m 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 1 2 5 U 1 0 3 4 1 .6 + 6 2 .6 8 .1 C a m 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 1 2 6 O m ic ro n A D S 2 7 2 6 0 3 4 4 .3 + 3 2 .3 3 .8 P e r 2 1 st a r S T 1 2 7 P i 2 6 0 3 4 6 .1 -1 2 .1 4 .4 * E ri 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 1 2 8 G a m m a 0 3 4 7 .2 -7 4 .2 3 .2 * H yi 2 1 st a r S T 1 2 9 ∑ 5 2 3 0 0 3 4 8 .3 + 1 1 .2 5 9 " Ta u 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 1 3 0 F ∆ 1 6 0 3 4 8 .6 -3 7 3 7 4 .9 8 " E ri 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 1 3 1 B E S A O 1 2 9 1 6 0 3 4 9 .5 + 6 5 .5 4 .5 * C a m 2 1 st a r S T 1 3 2 A ti k Z e ta 0 3 5 4 .1 + 3 1 .9 2 .9 * P e r 2 1 st a r S T 1 3 3 3 2 A D S 2 8 5 0 0 3 5 4 .3 -0 3 .0 5 7 " E ri 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 1 3 4 E p si lo n 0 3 5 7 .9 + 4 0 0 1 2 .9 9 " P e r 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 1 3 5 Z a u ra k G a m m a 0 3 5 8 .0 -1 3 .5 3 * E ri 2 1 st a r S T 1 3 6 L a m b d a 3 5 0 4 0 0 .7 + 1 2 .5 3 .3 * Ta u 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 1 3 7 O ∑ 5 3 1 A D S 2 9 9 5 0 4 0 7 .6 + 3 8 .1 7 .4 1 .4 " P e r 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 1 3 8 ∑ 4 8 5 S Z 0 4 0 7 .8 + 6 2 2 0 7 9 0 " C a m 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 1 3 9 O m ic ro n 2 4 0 0 4 1 5 .2 -0 7 .7 4 .5 8 3 " E ri 8 tr ip le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 1 4 0 E p si lo n 0 4 1 6 .5 -5 9 .3 4 .4 * R e t 2 1 st a r S T 1 4 1 T h e ta R u m ke r 3 0 4 1 7 .7 -6 3 .3 6 .2 4 " R e t 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 1 4 2 P h i A D S 3 1 3 7 0 4 2 0 .4 + 2 7 .4 5 5 2 " Ta u 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 1 4 3 T 0 4 2 2 .0 + 1 9 3 2 8 .4 S te lla r Ta u 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 1 4 4 ∑ 5 2 8 C h i 0 4 2 2 .6 + 2 5 .6 5 .5 1 9 .4 " Ta u 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 1 4 5 A D S 3 1 6 9 0 4 2 2 .7 + 1 5 .1 7 .3 1 .4 " Ta u 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 1 4 6 4 3 U p si lo n 3 0 4 2 4 .0 -3 4 .0 4 * E ri 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 1 4 7 ß 1 8 4 0 4 2 7 .9 -2 1 3 0 7 .3 1 .7 " E ri 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 1 4 8 ∑ 5 5 2 0 4 3 1 .4 + 4 0 0 1 7 9 " P e r 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 1 4 9 1 0 4 3 2 .0 + 5 3 5 5 5 .4 1 0 " C a m 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 1 5 0 ∑ 5 5 9 0 4 3 3 .5 + 1 8 0 1 6 .9 3 " Ta u 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 1 5 1 4 6 A D S 3 3 0 5 0 4 3 3 .9 -0 6 .7 5 .7 4 ' E ri 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 1 5 2 A ld e b a ra n A lp h a 0 4 3 5 .9 + 1 6 .5 0 .9 3 0 " Ta u 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 1 5 3 N u 4 8 0 4 3 6 .3 -0 3 .4 3 .9 1 1 ° E ri 2 1 st a r S T 1 5 4 5 3 0 4 3 8 .2 -1 4 .3 3 .9 * E ri 2 1 st a r S T 1 5 5 ∑ 5 7 2 0 4 3 8 .5 + 2 6 5 6 7 .3 4 " Ta u 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 1 5 6 5 4 0 4 4 0 .4 -1 9 .7 4 .3 * E ri 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 1 5 7 R 0 4 4 0 .5 -3 8 .2 6 .7 * C a e 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 1 5 8 ∑ 5 9 0 5 5 0 4 4 3 .6 -0 8 4 8 6 .7 9 " E ri 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 1 5 9 Io ta D u n lo p 1 8 0 4 5 0 .9 -5 3 .5 5 .6 1 2 " P ic 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 1 6 0 S T R V 0 4 5 1 .2 + 6 8 1 0 9 .2 S te lla r C a m 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 1 6 1 P i4 3 0 4 5 1 .2 + 0 5 .6 3 .7 * O ri 2 1 st a r S T 1 6 2 T T 0 4 5 1 .6 + 2 8 .5 8 * Ta u 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r 34 N um be r N am e O th er R A D ec M ag Se p Co n Co de S T 1 6 3 P i5 8 0 4 5 4 .2 + 0 2 .4 3 .7 * O ri 2 1 st a r S T 1 6 4 O m ic ro n 2 9 0 4 5 6 .4 + 1 3 .5 4 .1 * O ri 2 1 st a r S T 1 6 5 Io ta 0 4 5 7 .0 + 3 3 .2 2 .7 * A u r 2 1 st a r S T 1 6 6 P i6 1 0 0 4 5 8 .5 + 0 1 .7 4 .5 * O ri 2 1 st a r S T 1 6 7 O m e g a A D S 3 5 7 2 0 4 5 9 .3 + 3 7 .9 5 5 .4 " A u r 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 1 6 8 H in d s C ri m so n S ta r R 0 4 5 9 .6 -1 4 .8 5 .9 * L e p 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 1 6 9 ∑ 6 2 7 0 5 0 0 .6 + 0 3 3 6 6 .6 2 1 " O ri 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 1 7 0 ∑ 6 3 1 A D S 3 6 0 6 0 5 0 0 .7 -1 3 .5 7 .5 5 .5 " L e p 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 1 7 1 ∑ 6 3 0 A D S 3 6 2 3 0 5 0 2 .0 + 0 1 .6 6 .5 1 5 " O ri 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 1 7 2 E p si lo n 0 5 0 2 .0 + 4 3 4 9 2 .9 S te lla r A u r 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 1 7 3 Z e ta 8 0 5 0 2 .5 + 4 1 .1 3 .8 * A u r 2 1 st a r S T 1 7 4 W 0 5 0 5 .4 + 0 1 .2 8 .6 * O ri 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 1 7 5 E p si lo n 0 5 0 5 .5 -2 2 .4 3 .2 * L e p 2 1 st a r S T 1 7 6 E ta 1 0 0 5 0 6 .5 + 4 1 .2 3 .2 * A u r 2 1 st a r S T 1 7 7 O ∑ 9 8 1 4 0 5 0 7 .9 + 0 8 2 9 5 .9 0 .7 " O ri 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 1 7 8 T X 0 5 0 9 .1 + 3 9 .0 8 .5 * A u r 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 1 7 9 S Y 0 5 0 9 .8 -0 5 .6 9 * E ri 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 1 8 0 ∑ 6 4 4 0 5 1 0 .4 + 3 7 1 7 6 .8 2 " A u r 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 1 8 1 ∑ 6 5 5 Io ta 0 5 1 2 .3 -1 1 .9 4 .5 1 3 " L e p 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 1 8 2 R h o 0 5 1 3 .3 + 0 2 5 2 4 .5 7 " O ri 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 1 8 3 R ig e l B e ta O R I 0 5 1 4 .5 -0 8 .2 0 9 .4 " O ri 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 1 8 4 ∑ 6 5 3 1 4 0 5 1 5 .4 + 3 2 .7 5 .1 1 1 " A u r 6 tr ip le s ta r S T 1 8 5 C a p e lla A lp h a 0 5 1 6 .7 + 4 6 0 0 0 .1 * A u r 2 1 st a r S T 1 8 6 S 4 7 6 0 5 1 9 .3 -1 8 3 0 6 .2 3 9 " L e p 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 1 8 7 h 3 7 5 0 0 5 2 0 .5 -2 1 1 4 4 .7 4 " L e p 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 1 8 8 U V 0 5 2 1 .8 + 3 2 .5 7 .4 * A u r 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 1 8 9 A D S 3 9 5 4 A D S 3 9 5 4 0 5 2 1 .8 -2 4 .8 5 .5 3 .2 " L e p 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 1 9 0 ∑ 6 9 6 A D S 3 9 6 2 0 5 2 2 .8 + 0 3 .6 5 3 2 " O ri 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 1 9 1 ∑ 7 0 1 A D S 3 9 7 8 0 5 2 3 .3 -0 8 .4 6 6 " O ri 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 1 9 2 E ta 0 5 2 4 .5 -0 2 2 4 3 .4 1 .5 " O ri 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 1 9 3 S ig m a A D S 3 9 8 4 0 5 2 4 .7 + 3 7 .4 5 9 " A u r 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 1 9 4 T h e ta D u n lo p 2 0 0 5 2 4 .8 -5 2 .3 6 .8 3 8 " P ic 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 1 9 5 B e lla tr ix G a m m a 0 5 2 5 .1 + 0 6 .3 1 .6 * O ri 2 1 st a r S T 1 9 6 ∑ 6 9 8 A D S 4 0 0 0 0 5 2 5 .2 + 3 4 .9 6 .6 3 1 " A u r 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 1 9 7 ∑ 7 1 6 1 1 8 0 5 2 9 .3 + 2 5 0 9 5 .8 5 " Ta u 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 1 9 8 ∑ 7 2 5 3 1 0 5 2 9 .7 -0 1 .1 4 .7 * O ri 2 1 st a r S T 1 9 9 T L 9 K B C G ro u p 0 5 3 0 .0 + 1 7 .0 5 5 ° Ta u 0 a st e ri sm S T 2 0 0 D e lt a A D S 4 1 3 4 0 5 3 2 .0 -0 0 .3 2 .2 5 3 " O ri 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 2 0 1 1 1 9 C E 0 5 3 2 .2 + 1 8 .6 4 .7 * Ta u 2 1 st a r S T 2 0 2 ∑ 7 1 8 0 5 3 2 .4 + 4 9 2 4 7 .5 8 " A u r 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 2 0 3 R T 0 5 3 3 .2 + 0 7 .2 8 * O ri 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 2 0 4 ∑ 7 4 7 A D S 4 1 8 2 0 5 3 5 .0 -0 6 .0 4 .8 3 6 " O ri 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 2 0 5 L a m b d a 0 5 3 5 .1 + 0 9 5 6 3 .4 4 " O ri 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 2 0 6 Tr a p e zi u m 0 5 3 5 .3 -0 5 2 3 5 .1 1 3 " O ri 7 q u a d ru p le s ta r S T 2 0 7 ∑ 7 5 2 Io ta 0 5 3 5 .4 -0 5 5 5 2 .9 1 1 " O ri 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 2 0 8 A ln ila m E p si lo n 0 5 3 6 .2 -0 1 .2 1 .7 * O ri 2 1 st a r S T 2 0 9 P h i2 0 5 3 6 .9 + 0 9 .3 4 * O ri 2 1 st a r S T 2 1 0 Z e ta 1 2 3 0 5 3 7 .6 + 2 1 .1 3 * Ta u 2 1 st a r S T 2 1 1 S ig m a 0 5 3 8 .7 -0 2 3 6 3 .7 1 1 " O ri 7 q u a d ru p le s ta r S T 2 1 2 P h a ct A lp h a 0 5 3 9 .6 -3 4 .1 2 .6 * C o l 2 1 st a r S T 2 1 3 A ln it a k Z e ta 0 5 4 0 .8 -0 1 .9 2 2 .4 " O ri 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 2 1 4 U 2 0 5 4 2 .2 + 6 2 .5 7 .7 * C a m 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 2 1 5 G a m m a A D S 4 3 3 4 0 5 4 4 .5 -2 2 .5 3 .7 9 7 " L e p 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 2 1 6 Y 0 5 4 5 .7 + 2 0 .7 7 .1 * Ta u 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 2 1 7 M u S A O 1 9 6 1 4 9 0 5 4 6 .0 -3 2 .3 5 .2 * C o l 2 1 st a r 35 N um be r N am e O th er R A D ec M ag Se p Co n Co de S T 2 1 8 S a ip h K a p p a 0 5 4 7 .8 -0 9 .7 2 * O ri 2 1 st a r S T 2 1 9 ∑ 7 9 5 5 2 0 5 4 8 .0 + 0 6 2 7 6 .1 "1 .3 " O ri 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 2 2 0 B e ta W a zn 0 5 5 1 .0 -3 5 .8 3 .1 * C o l 2 1 st a r S T 2 2 1 D e lt a 0 5 5 1 .3 -2 0 .9 3 .8 * L e p 2 1 st a r S T 2 2 2 N u 0 5 5 1 .5 + 3 9 .1 4 3 0 " A u r 2 1 st a r S T 2 2 3 ∑ 8 1 7 0 5 5 4 .9 + 0 7 0 2 8 .8 1 9 " O ri 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 2 2 4 B e te lg e u se A lp h a 0 5 5 5 .2 + 0 7 2 4 0 .5 S te lla r O ri 2 1 st a r S T 2 2 5 U 0 5 5 5 .8 + 2 0 .2 5 .3 * O ri 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 2 2 6 T h e ta 0 5 5 9 .7 + 3 7 1 3 2 .6 3 .5 " A u r 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 2 2 7 P i 0 5 5 9 .9 + 4 5 .9 4 .3 1 ° A u r 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 2 2 8 ∆ 2 3 0 6 0 4 .8 -4 8 2 7 7 2 .7 " P u p 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 2 2 9 ∑ 8 5 5 0 6 0 9 .0 + 0 2 3 0 6 3 0 " O ri 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 2 3 0 T U 0 6 1 0 .9 + 2 6 .0 7 .5 * G e m 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 2 3 1 ∑ 8 4 5 4 1 0 6 1 1 .7 + 4 8 4 2 6 .1 8 " A u r 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 2 3 2 S S 0 6 1 3 .4 + 4 7 .0 1 0 * A u r 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 2 3 3 G a m m a 0 6 1 4 .9 -0 6 .3 4 8 ° M o n 2 1 st a r S T 2 3 4 P ro p u s E ta 0 6 1 4 .9 + 2 2 .5 3 .3 * G e m 2 1 st a r S T 2 3 5 ∑ 8 7 2 A D S 4 8 4 9 0 6 1 5 .6 + 3 6 .2 6 .9 1 1 " A u r 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 2 3 6 K S 0 6 1 9 .7 -0 5 .3 9 .5 * M o n 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 2 3 7 Z e ta F u ru d 0 6 2 0 .3 -3 0 .1 3 8 .5 ° C m a 2 1 st a r S T 2 3 8 V 0 6 2 2 .7 -0 2 .2 6 * M o n 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 2 3 9 M ir za m B e ta 0 6 2 2 .7 -1 8 .0 2 * C m a 2 1 st a r S T 2 4 0 M u 0 6 2 3 .0 + 2 2 .5 2 .9 * G e m 2 1 st a r S T 2 4 1 8 0 6 2 3 .8 + 0 4 3 6 4 .3 1 3 " M o n 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 2 4 2 C a n o p u s A lp h a 0 6 2 4 .0 -5 2 4 2 -0 .7 * C a r 2 1 st a r S T 2 4 3 B L B L 0 6 2 5 .5 + 1 4 .7 8 .5 * O ri 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 2 4 4 1 5 0 6 2 7 .8 + 2 0 4 7 6 .6 2 7 " G e m 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 2 4 5 B e ta 0 6 2 8 .8 -0 7 0 2 3 .8 3 " M o n 6 tr ip le s ta r S T 2 4 6 A D S 5 1 5 0 0 6 3 1 .8 + 3 8 .9 1 1 .5 4 .5 " A u r 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 2 4 7 ∑ 9 2 4 2 0 0 6 3 2 .3 + 1 7 .8 6 .3 2 0 " G e m 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 2 4 8 A D S 5 1 8 8 0 6 3 4 .3 + 3 8 .1 6 .7 4 3 " A u r 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 2 4 9 C R 0 6 3 4 .4 + 1 6 .1 8 .5 * G e m 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 2 5 0 ∑ 9 2 8 A D S 5 1 9 1 0 6 3 4 .7 + 3 8 .4 7 .6 3 .5 " A u r 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 2 5 1 A D S 5 2 0 1 0 6 3 5 .1 + 3 7 .1 7 .4 2 .6 " A u r 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 2 5 2 ∑ 9 2 9 A D S 5 2 0 8 0 6 3 5 .4 + 3 7 .7 7 .4 6 " A u r 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 2 5 3 ∑ 9 3 9 0 6 3 5 .9 + 0 5 .3 8 .3 3 0 " M o n 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 2 5 4 A D S 5 2 2 1 0 6 3 6 .2 + 3 8 .0 8 .5 1 .3 " A u r 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 2 5 5 N u 1 0 6 3 6 .4 -1 8 .7 6 1 7 .5 " C m a 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 2 5 6 U U 0 6 3 6 .5 + 3 8 .5 5 .1 * A u r 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 2 5 7 A D S 5 2 4 0 0 6 3 6 .9 + 3 8 .2 9 .7 2 .2 " A u r 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 2 5 8 A D S 5 2 4 5 0 6 3 7 .3 + 3 8 .4 8 .8 1 0 " A u r 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 2 5 9 S o u th 5 2 9 0 6 3 7 .6 + 1 2 .2 7 .6 7 0 " G e m 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 2 6 0 In n e s5 0 6 3 8 .0 -6 1 .5 6 .4 2 .4 " P ic 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 2 6 1 A D S 5 2 6 5 0 6 3 8 .4 + 3 8 .8 9 .6 4 .6 " A u r 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 2 6 2 In n e s1 1 5 6 A D S 5 3 1 1 0 6 3 9 .1 -2 9 .1 8 0 .7 " C m a 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 2 6 3 S A O 1 7 2 1 0 6 0 6 3 9 .5 -3 0 .0 7 .8 2 .5 ° C m a 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 2 6 4 ∑ 9 5 3 0 6 4 1 .2 + 0 8 5 9 7 .1 7 " M o n 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 2 6 5 V W 0 6 4 2 .2 + 3 1 .5 8 .7 * G e m 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 2 6 6 S ir iu s A lp h a 0 6 4 5 .1 -1 6 .7 -1 9 " C m a 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 2 6 7 ∑ 9 4 8 1 2 0 6 4 6 .2 + 5 9 2 7 4 .9 2 " Ly n 8 tr ip le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 2 6 8 ∑ 9 5 8 0 6 4 8 .2 + 5 5 4 2 5 .5 5 " Ly n 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 2 6 9 K a p p a 1 3 0 6 4 9 .8 -3 2 .5 4 * C m a 2 1 st a r S T 2 7 0 ∑ 9 6 3 1 4 0 6 5 3 .1 + 5 9 .5 5 .7 0 .4 " Ly n 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 2 7 1 G Y 0 6 5 3 .2 -0 4 .6 9 .4 * M o n 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 2 7 2 ∑ 9 8 7 0 6 5 4 .1 -0 5 5 1 7 .1 1 .3 " M o n 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e 36 N um be r N am e O th er R A D ec M ag Se p Co n Co de S T 2 7 3 O m ic ro n 1 1 6 0 6 5 4 .1 -2 4 .2 3 .9 * C m a 2 1 st a r S T 2 7 4 T h e ta 1 4 0 6 5 4 .2 -1 2 .0 4 .1 * C m a 2 1 st a r S T 2 7 5 3 8 0 6 5 4 .6 + 1 3 1 1 4 .7 7 " G e m 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 2 7 6 ∑ 9 9 7 M u 0 6 5 6 .1 -1 4 0 2 5 .3 2 .8 " C m a 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 2 7 7 B G 0 6 5 6 .4 + 0 7 .1 9 .2 * M o n 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 2 7 8 O ∑ 8 0 0 6 5 8 .1 + 1 4 .2 7 .3 2 ' G e m 0 a st e ri sm S T 2 7 9 R V 0 6 5 8 .4 + 0 6 .2 7 * M o n 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 2 8 0 E p si lo n 2 1 0 6 5 8 .6 -2 9 .0 1 .5 7 .5 " C m a 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 2 8 1 S ig m a 2 2 0 7 0 1 .7 -2 7 .9 3 .5 * C m a 2 1 st a r S T 2 8 2 O m ic ro n 2 2 4 0 7 0 3 .0 -2 3 .8 3 * C m a 2 1 st a r S T 2 8 3 D u n lo p 3 8 0 7 0 4 .0 -4 3 .6 5 .6 2 0 .5 " P u p 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 2 8 4 M e kb u d a Z e ta 0 7 0 4 .1 + 2 0 .6 3 .7 * G e m 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 2 8 5 ∑ 1 0 0 9 0 7 0 5 .7 + 5 2 4 5 6 .9 4 .1 " Ly n 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 2 8 6 R 0 7 0 7 .4 + 2 2 .7 6 * G e m 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 2 8 7 W R V 0 7 0 8 .1 -1 1 5 5 6 .4 S te lla r C M a 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 2 8 8 G a m m a D u n lo p 4 2 0 7 0 8 .8 -7 0 .5 4 1 3 .6 " V o l 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 2 8 9 Ta u A D S 5 8 4 6 0 7 1 1 .1 + 3 0 .2 4 .4 1 .9 " G e m 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 2 9 0 ∑ 1 0 3 5 0 7 1 2 .0 + 2 2 1 7 8 .2 4 " G e m 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 2 9 1 ∑ 1 0 3 7 A D S 5 8 7 1 0 7 1 2 .8 + 2 7 .2 7 .2 1 .3 " G e m 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 2 9 2 O m e g a 2 8 0 7 1 4 .8 -2 6 .8 3 .9 * C m a 2 1 st a r S T 2 9 3 h 3 9 4 5 0 7 1 6 .6 -2 3 1 9 4 .5 2 7 " C M a 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 2 9 4 Ta u h 3 9 4 8 0 7 1 8 .7 -2 4 5 7 4 .4 1 5 " C M a 6 tr ip le s ta r S T 2 9 5 D e lt a 5 5 0 7 2 0 .1 + 2 1 5 9 3 .5 6 " G e m 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 2 9 6 ∑ 1 0 6 2 1 9 0 7 2 2 .9 + 5 5 1 7 5 .6 1 5 " Ly n 6 tr ip le s ta r S T 2 9 7 G a m m a 4 0 7 2 8 .2 + 0 8 .9 4 .3 * C m i 2 1 st a r S T 2 9 8 S ig m a 0 7 2 9 .2 -4 3 .3 3 .3 2 2 " P u p 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 2 9 9 ∑ 1 0 9 3 A D S 6 1 1 7 0 7 3 0 .3 + 5 0 .0 8 .8 0 .8 " Ly n 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 3 0 0 n "H N 1 9 , h 2 6 9 " 0 7 3 4 .3 -2 3 2 8 5 .1 1 0 " P u p 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 3 0 1 C a st o r A lp h a 0 7 3 4 .6 + 3 1 .9 2 1 .8 " G e m 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 3 0 2 U p si lo n 6 9 0 7 3 5 .9 + 2 6 .9 4 .1 2 .5 ° G e m 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 3 0 3 ∑ 1 1 2 1 0 7 3 6 .6 -1 4 2 9 7 .9 7 " P u p 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 3 0 4 K 0 7 3 8 .8 -2 6 4 8 3 .8 1 0 " P u p 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 3 0 5 P ro cy o n A lp h a 0 7 3 9 .3 + 0 5 1 4 0 .4 S te lla r C M i 2 1 st a r S T 3 0 6 O ∑ 1 7 9 K a p p a 0 7 4 4 .4 + 2 4 2 3 3 .7 7 " G e m 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 3 0 7 ∑ 1 1 3 8 2 0 7 4 5 .5 -1 4 4 1 6 .1 1 7 " P u p 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 3 0 8 ∑ 1 1 2 7 0 7 4 7 .0 + 6 4 0 3 7 5 " C a m 6 tr ip le s ta r S T 3 0 9 ∑ 1 1 4 9 0 7 4 9 .4 + 0 3 1 3 7 .9 2 2 " C m i 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 3 1 0 U V 0 7 5 5 .1 + 2 2 0 0 8 .2 S te lla r G e m 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 3 1 1 C h i 0 7 5 6 .8 -5 3 .0 3 .5 4 ° C a r 2 1 st a r S T 3 1 2 D u n lo p 5 9 0 7 5 9 .2 -5 0 .0 6 .5 1 6 " P u p 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 3 1 3 S -h 8 6 0 8 0 2 .5 + 6 3 .1 6 4 9 " C a m 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 3 1 4 N a o s Z e ta 0 8 0 3 .6 -4 0 .0 2 .3 4 ° P u p 2 1 st a r S T 3 1 5 R T 0 8 0 5 .4 -3 8 .8 8 .5 * P u p 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 3 1 6 R U 0 8 0 7 .5 -2 2 .9 8 .9 * P u p 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 3 1 7 E p si lo n R u m ke r 7 0 8 0 7 .9 -6 8 .6 4 .4 6 " V o l 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 3 1 8 G a m m a D u n lo p 6 5 0 8 0 9 .5 -4 7 .3 1 .9 4 1 " V e l 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 3 1 9 Z e ta 0 8 1 2 .2 + 1 7 3 9 4 .7 0 .6 " C n c 8 tr ip le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 3 2 0 c R u m ke r 8 0 8 1 5 .3 -6 2 .9 5 .3 4 " C a r 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 3 2 1 B e ta 1 7 0 8 1 6 .5 + 0 9 .2 3 .5 * C n c 2 1 st a r S T 3 2 2 R 0 8 1 6 .6 + 1 1 .7 6 .1 * C n c 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 3 2 3 K a p p a 0 8 1 9 .8 -7 1 .5 5 .4 6 5 " V o l 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 3 2 4 A C 0 8 2 2 .7 -1 5 .9 8 .9 * P u p 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 3 2 5 3 1 0 8 2 2 .8 + 4 3 .2 4 .3 1 5 ° Ly n 2 1 st a r S T 3 2 6 B e ta 0 8 2 5 .7 -6 6 .1 3 .8 6 ° V o l 2 1 st a r S T 3 2 7 h 4 9 0 3 0 8 2 6 .3 -3 9 .1 6 .5 8 " P u p 2 d o u b le s ta r 37 N um be r N am e O th er R A D ec M ag Se p Co n Co de S T 3 2 8 ∑ 1 2 2 4 2 4 0 8 2 6 .7 + 2 4 3 2 7 .1 6 " C n c 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 3 2 9 ∑ 1 2 2 3 P h i 0 8 2 6 .7 + 2 6 5 6 6 .3 5 " C n c 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 3 3 0 h 4 1 0 4 0 8 2 9 .1 -4 7 .9 5 .5 3 .6 " V e l 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 3 3 1 ∆ 7 0 0 8 2 9 .5 -4 4 4 4 5 5 " V e l 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 3 3 2 h 4 1 0 7 0 8 3 1 .4 -3 9 0 4 6 .4 4 " V e l 6 tr ip le s ta r S T 3 3 3 ∑ 1 2 4 5 0 8 3 5 .8 + 0 6 3 7 6 1 0 " C n c 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 3 3 4 S ig m a 5 H Y A 0 8 3 8 .8 + 0 3 .3 4 .4 * H ya 2 1 st a r S T 3 3 5 h 4 1 2 8 0 8 3 9 .2 -6 0 .3 6 .9 1 .4 " C a r 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 3 3 6 ∑ 1 2 5 4 0 8 4 0 .4 + 1 9 4 0 6 .4 2 1 " C n c 7 q u a d ru p le s ta r S T 3 3 7 A lp h a 0 8 4 3 .6 -3 3 .2 3 .7 * P yx 2 1 st a r S T 3 3 8 D e lt a In n e s 1 0 0 8 4 4 .7 -5 4 .7 2 .1 2 .6 " V e l 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 3 3 9 ∑ 1 2 7 0 A D S 6 9 7 7 0 8 4 5 .3 -0 2 .6 6 .4 5 " H ya 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 3 4 0 ∑ 1 2 6 8 Io ta 0 8 4 6 .7 + 2 8 4 6 4 3 0 " C n c 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 3 4 1 E p si lo n 0 8 4 6 .8 + 0 6 2 5 3 .4 3 " H yd 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 3 4 2 ∑ 1 2 8 2 0 8 5 0 .8 + 3 5 0 3 7 .5 4 " Ly n 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 3 4 3 X 0 8 5 5 .4 + 1 7 .2 5 .6 * C n c 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 3 4 4 ∑ 1 2 9 8 6 6 0 9 0 1 .4 + 3 2 1 5 5 .9 5 " C n c 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 3 4 5 R h o 0 9 0 2 .5 + 6 7 .6 4 .8 1 ° U m a 2 1 st a r S T 3 4 6 ∑ 1 3 1 1 0 9 0 7 .5 + 2 2 5 9 6 .9 8 " C n c 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 3 4 7 S u h a il L a m b d a 0 9 0 8 .0 -4 3 2 6 2 .2 S te lla r V e l 2 1 st a r S T 3 4 8 S ig m a 2 0 9 1 0 .4 + 6 7 0 8 4 .8 4 " U m a 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 3 4 9 a 0 9 1 1 .0 -5 9 .0 3 .4 5 0 ' C a r 2 1 st a r S T 3 5 0 h 4 1 8 8 0 9 1 2 .5 -4 3 .6 6 .7 2 .7 ' V e l 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 3 5 1 h 4 1 9 1 0 9 1 4 .4 -4 3 1 3 5 .2 6 " V e l 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 3 5 2 ∑ 1 3 2 1 0 9 1 4 .9 + 5 2 4 2 8 .1 1 8 " U m a 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 3 5 3 g 0 9 1 6 .2 -5 7 .5 4 .3 5 ' C a r 2 1 st a r S T 3 5 4 R T 0 9 1 8 .4 + 5 1 .4 8 .6 * U m a 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 3 5 5 ∑ 1 3 3 4 3 8 0 9 1 8 .8 + 3 6 4 8 3 .9 3 " Ly n 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 3 5 6 ∑ 1 3 3 8 0 9 2 1 .0 + 3 8 1 1 6 .6 1 " Ly n 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 3 5 7 A lp h a 4 0 0 9 2 1 .1 + 3 4 .4 3 .1 * Ly n 2 1 st a r S T 3 5 8 K a p p a 0 9 2 2 .1 -5 5 .0 2 .5 * V e l 2 1 st a r S T 3 5 9 ∑ 1 3 4 7 0 9 2 3 .3 + 0 3 3 0 7 .2 2 1 " H ya 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 3 6 0 K a p p a A D S 7 3 5 1 0 9 2 4 .7 + 2 6 .2 4 .5 2 .1 " L e o 6 tr ip le s ta r S T 3 6 1 ∑ 1 3 5 5 0 9 2 7 .3 + 0 6 1 4 7 .5 2 .3 " H ya 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 3 6 2 A lp h a rd A lp h a 0 9 2 7 .6 -0 8 4 0 2 S te lla r H ya 2 1 st a r S T 3 6 3 ∑ 1 3 5 6 O m e g a 0 9 2 8 .5 + 0 9 .1 5 .9 0 .5 " L e o 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 3 6 4 D u n lo p 7 6 0 9 2 8 .6 -4 5 .5 7 .8 6 1 " V e l 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 3 6 5 ∑ 1 3 6 0 0 9 3 0 .6 + 1 0 3 5 8 .3 1 4 " L e o 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 3 6 6 Z e ta 0 9 3 0 .8 -3 1 5 3 5 .8 8 " A n t 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 3 6 7 N 0 9 3 1 .2 -5 7 .0 3 .1 * V e l 2 1 st a r S T 3 6 8 ∑ 1 3 5 1 2 3 0 9 3 1 .5 + 6 3 0 3 3 .8 2 3 " U m a 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 3 6 9 A lt e rf L a m b d a 0 9 3 1 .7 + 2 3 .0 4 .3 * L e o 2 1 st a r S T 3 7 0 R 0 9 3 2 .2 -6 2 .8 3 .8 * C a r 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 3 7 1 ∑ 1 3 6 9 A D S 7 4 3 8 0 9 3 5 .4 + 4 0 .0 6 .5 2 5 " Ly n 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 3 7 2 Io ta 0 9 3 9 .9 -0 1 .1 3 .9 * H ya 2 1 st a r S T 3 7 3 U p si lo n R u m ke r 1 1 0 9 4 7 .1 -6 5 .1 3 .1 5 " C a r 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 3 7 4 R R V 0 9 4 7 .6 + 1 1 2 6 4 .4 S te lla r L e o 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 3 7 5 W 0 9 5 1 .0 -0 2 .0 9 * S ex 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 3 7 6 Y 0 9 5 1 .1 -2 3 .0 8 .3 * H ya 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 3 7 7 R a sa la s M u 0 9 5 2 .8 + 2 6 .0 3 .9 * L e o 2 1 st a r S T 3 7 8 h 4 2 6 2 A D S 7 5 7 1 0 9 5 4 .5 -1 2 .9 8 .7 8 " H ya 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 3 7 9 R e g u lu s A lp h a 1 0 0 8 .4 + 1 1 5 8 1 .4 S te lla r L e o 2 1 st a r S T 3 8 0 S 1 0 0 9 .4 -6 1 .6 4 .5 * C a r 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 3 8 1 A D S 7 7 0 4 1 0 1 6 .3 + 1 7 .7 7 .2 1 .4 " L e o 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 3 8 2 A d h a fe ra Z e ta 1 0 1 6 .7 + 2 3 .4 3 .4 5 .5 ' L e o 2 d o u b le s ta r 38 N um be r N am e O th er R A D ec M ag Se p Co n Co de S T 3 8 3 q 1 0 1 7 .1 -6 1 .3 3 .4 * C a r 2 1 st a r S T 3 8 4 h 4 3 0 6 1 0 1 9 .1 -6 4 .7 5 .6 2 .1 " C a r 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 3 8 5 A lg ie b a G a m m a 1 0 2 0 .0 + 1 9 .8 2 .5 4 .4 " L e o 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 3 8 6 Ta n ia A u st ra lis M u 1 0 2 2 .3 + 4 1 .5 3 * U m a 2 1 st a r S T 3 8 7 M u 4 2 1 0 2 6 .1 -1 6 .8 3 .8 * H ya 2 1 st a r S T 3 8 8 A lp h a 1 0 2 7 .2 -3 1 .1 4 .3 * A n t 2 1 st a r S T 3 8 9 4 5 1 0 2 7 .6 + 0 9 .8 6 3 .8 " L e o 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 3 9 0 D e lt a H N 5 0 1 0 2 9 .6 -3 0 3 6 5 .7 1 1 " A n t 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 3 9 1 p 1 0 3 2 .0 -6 1 .7 3 .3 * C a r 2 1 st a r S T 3 9 2 R h o 4 7 1 0 3 2 .8 + 0 9 .3 3 .9 * L e o 2 1 st a r S T 3 9 3 4 9 1 0 3 5 .0 + 0 8 3 9 5 .7 2 " L e o 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 3 9 4 U 1 0 3 5 .2 -3 9 .6 8 .1 * A n t 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 3 9 5 G a m m a 1 0 3 5 .5 -7 8 .6 4 .1 * C h a 2 1 st a r S T 3 9 6 U 1 0 3 7 .6 -1 3 .4 7 * H ya 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 3 9 7 D u n lo p 9 5 x 1 0 3 9 .3 -5 5 .6 4 .3 5 2 " V e l 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 3 9 8 ∑ 1 4 6 6 3 5 1 0 4 3 .4 + 0 4 4 4 6 .3 7 " S ex 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 3 9 9 R 1 0 4 4 .6 + 6 8 .8 7 .5 * U m a 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 4 0 0 V Y 1 0 4 5 .1 + 6 7 .4 5 .9 * U m a 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 4 0 1 D e lt a 1 0 4 5 .8 -8 0 .5 4 .5 4 .5 ' C h a 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 4 0 2 ∑ 1 4 7 6 4 0 1 0 4 9 .3 -0 4 0 1 6 .9 2 .5 " S ex 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 4 0 3 N u 1 0 4 9 .6 -1 6 .2 3 .1 * H ya 2 1 st a r S T 4 0 4 5 4 A D S 7 9 7 9 1 0 5 5 .6 + 2 4 .8 4 .5 6 .8 " L e o 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 4 0 5 S A O 2 5 1 3 4 2 1 1 1 7 .5 -6 3 .5 7 7 " C a r 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 4 0 6 X i A D S 8 1 1 9 1 1 1 8 .2 + 3 1 .5 4 .5 1 .3 " U m a 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 4 0 7 A lu la B o re a lis N u 1 1 1 8 .5 + 3 3 .1 3 .5 7 " U m a 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 4 0 8 ∑ 1 5 2 9 1 1 1 9 .4 -0 1 3 8 7 1 0 " L e o 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 4 0 9 h 4 4 3 2 1 1 2 3 .4 -6 5 .0 5 .1 2 .3 " M u s 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 4 1 0 Io ta A D S 8 1 4 8 1 1 2 3 .9 + 1 0 .5 4 1 .3 " L e o 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 4 1 1 ∑ 1 5 4 0 8 3 1 1 2 6 .8 + 0 3 0 0 6 .2 2 9 " L e o 6 tr ip le s ta r S T 4 1 2 Ta u 8 4 1 1 2 7 .9 + 0 2 .9 5 .5 1 .5 ' L e o 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 4 1 3 G ia u sa r L a m b d a 1 1 3 1 .4 + 6 9 .3 3 .8 2 0 ' D ra 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 4 1 4 8 8 x 1 1 3 1 .8 + 1 4 2 1 6 .4 1 6 " L e o 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 4 1 5 N 1 1 3 2 .3 -2 9 1 6 5 .8 9 " H yd 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 4 1 6 In n e s7 8 1 1 3 3 .6 -4 0 .6 6 1 " C e n 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 4 1 7 ∑ 1 5 5 2 1 1 3 4 .7 + 1 6 4 8 6 3 " L e o 6 tr ip le s ta r S T 4 1 8 N u 1 1 4 5 .9 + 0 6 .5 4 * V ir 2 1 st a r S T 4 1 9 D e n e b o la B e ta 1 1 4 9 .1 + 1 4 3 4 2 .1 S te lla r L e o 2 1 st a r S T 4 2 0 B e ta 1 1 5 2 .9 -3 3 .9 4 .7 0 .9 " H ya 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 4 2 1 O ∑ 1 1 2 1 1 5 4 .6 + 1 9 .4 8 .4 7 3 " L e o 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 4 2 2 ∑ 1 5 7 9 6 5 1 1 5 5 .1 + 4 6 2 9 6 .7 4 " U m a 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 4 2 3 E p si lo n h 4 4 8 6 1 1 5 9 .6 -7 8 .2 5 .4 0 .9 " C h a 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 4 2 4 ∑ 1 5 9 3 1 2 0 3 .5 -0 2 2 6 8 .7 1 .3 " V ir 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 4 2 5 Z e ta 2 1 2 0 4 .3 + 2 1 .5 6 3 .6 " C o m 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 4 2 6 D e lt a 1 2 0 8 .4 -5 0 .7 2 .6 4 .5 ' C e n 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 4 2 7 ∑ 1 6 0 4 1 2 0 9 .5 -1 1 5 1 6 .6 1 0 " C rv 6 tr ip le s ta r S T 4 2 8 E p si lo n 1 2 1 0 .1 -2 2 .6 3 * C rv 2 1 st a r S T 4 2 9 R u m ke r1 4 1 2 1 4 .0 -4 5 .7 5 .6 2 .9 " C e n 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 4 3 0 D e lt a 1 2 1 5 .1 -5 8 .7 2 .8 * C ru 2 1 st a r S T 4 3 1 2 A D S 8 4 8 9 1 2 1 6 .1 + 4 0 .7 6 1 1 .5 " C vn 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 4 3 2 E p si lo n 1 2 1 7 .6 -6 8 .0 4 .1 * M u s 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 4 3 3 ∑ 1 6 2 7 1 2 1 8 .1 -0 3 5 6 6 .6 2 0 " V ir 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 4 3 4 R 1 2 1 9 .6 -1 9 .3 6 .7 * C rv 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 4 3 5 ∑ 1 6 3 3 1 2 2 0 .6 + 2 7 0 3 6 .3 9 " C o m 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 4 3 6 E p si lo n 1 2 2 1 .4 -6 0 .4 3 .6 * C ru 2 1 st a r S T 4 3 7 M 4 0 W in n e ck e 4 1 2 2 2 .4 + 5 8 0 5 9 5 0 " U M a 2 d o u b le s ta r 39 N um be r N am e O th er R A D ec M ag Se p Co n Co de S T 4 3 8 1 7 A D S 8 5 3 1 1 2 2 2 .5 + 0 5 .3 6 .5 2 1 " V ir 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 4 3 9 ∑ 1 6 3 9 A D S 8 5 3 9 1 2 2 4 .4 + 2 5 .6 6 .8 1 .6 " C o m 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 4 4 0 S 1 2 2 4 .6 -4 9 .4 9 .2 * C e n 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 4 4 1 S S R V 1 2 2 5 .3 + 0 0 4 8 6 S te lla r V ir 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 4 4 2 A cr u x A lp h a 1 2 2 6 .6 -6 3 .1 1 4 .4 " C ru 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 4 4 3 3 C 2 7 3 1 2 2 9 .1 + 0 2 .0 1 2 .8 * V ir 0 a st e ri sm S T 4 4 4 A lg o ra b D e lt a 1 2 2 9 .9 -1 6 .5 3 2 4 " C rv 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 4 4 5 G a cr u x G a m m a 1 2 3 1 .2 -5 7 .1 1 .6 1 0 " C ru 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 4 4 6 ∑ 1 6 4 9 A D S 8 5 8 5 1 2 3 1 .6 -1 1 .1 8 1 5 " V ir 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 4 4 7 2 4 1 2 3 5 .1 + 1 8 2 3 5 2 0 " C V n 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 4 4 8 A lp h a 1 2 3 7 .2 -6 9 .1 2 .7 * M u s 2 1 st a r S T 4 4 9 A D S 8 6 1 2 1 2 3 7 .7 -2 7 .1 5 .5 1 .3 " H ya 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 4 5 0 ∑ 1 6 6 9 1 2 4 1 .3 -1 3 0 1 5 .3 5 " C rv 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 4 5 1 G a m m a h 4 5 3 9 1 2 4 1 .5 -4 9 .0 2 .2 1 " C e n 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 4 5 2 P o rr im a G a m m a 1 2 4 1 .7 -0 1 .4 3 .5 3 " V ir 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 4 5 3 Y R V 1 2 4 5 .1 + 4 5 2 6 7 .4 S te lla r C V n 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 4 5 4 Io ta h 4 5 4 7 1 2 4 5 .6 -6 1 .0 4 .7 2 7 C ru 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 4 5 5 B e ta 1 2 4 6 .3 -6 8 .1 3 .7 1 .4 M u s 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 4 5 6 M im o sa B e ta 1 2 4 7 .7 -5 9 .7 1 .3 * C ru 2 1 st a r S T 4 5 7 ∑ 1 6 9 4 3 2 1 2 4 9 .2 + 8 3 2 5 5 .3 2 2 " C a m 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 4 5 8 ∑ 1 6 8 7 3 5 1 2 5 3 .3 + 2 1 1 4 5 .1 2 9 " C o m 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 4 5 9 M u D u n lo p 1 2 6 1 2 5 4 .6 -5 7 .2 4 .3 3 5 " C ru 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 4 6 0 D e lt a 1 2 5 5 .6 + 0 3 .4 3 .4 * V ir 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 4 6 1 C o r C a ro li A lp h a 1 2 5 6 .0 + 3 8 .3 3 1 9 " C vn 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 4 6 2 R Y 1 2 5 6 .4 + 6 6 .0 6 .8 * D ra 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 4 6 3 ∑ 1 6 9 9 1 2 5 8 .7 + 2 7 2 8 8 .8 1 .5 " C o m 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 4 6 4 D e lt a 1 3 0 2 .3 -7 1 .5 3 .6 8 ' M u s 2 1 st a r S T 4 6 5 T h e ta R u m ke r 1 6 1 3 0 8 .1 -6 5 .3 5 .7 5 .3 " M u s 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 4 6 6 ∑ 1 7 2 4 "5 1 , T h e ta " 1 3 0 9 .9 -0 5 3 2 4 .4 7 " V ir 8 tr ip le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 4 6 7 A lp h a 1 3 1 0 .0 + 1 7 3 2 5 0 .5 " C o m 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 4 6 8 5 4 1 3 1 3 .4 -1 8 5 0 6 .8 5 " V ir 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 4 6 9 J D u n lo p 1 3 3 1 3 2 2 .6 -6 1 .0 4 .7 1 ' C e n 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 4 7 0 M iz a r Z e ta 1 3 2 3 .9 + 5 4 5 6 2 .3 1 4 " U m a 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 4 7 1 S p ic a A lp h a 1 3 2 5 .2 -1 1 .2 1 * V ir 2 1 st a r S T 4 7 2 O ∑ ∑ 1 2 3 1 3 2 7 .1 + 6 4 4 3 6 .7 6 9 " D ra 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 4 7 3 R V 1 3 2 9 .7 -2 3 1 7 4 S te lla r H yd 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 4 7 4 ∑ 1 7 5 5 A D S 8 9 3 4 1 3 3 2 .3 + 3 6 .8 7 4 .4 " C vn 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 4 7 5 S 1 3 3 3 .0 -0 7 .2 6 * V ir 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 4 7 6 2 5 A D S 8 9 7 4 1 3 3 7 .5 + 3 6 .3 5 1 .8 " C vn 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 4 7 7 ∑ 1 7 6 3 A D S 8 9 7 2 1 3 3 7 .6 -0 7 .9 7 .9 2 .8 " V ir 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 4 7 8 E p si lo n 1 3 3 9 .9 -5 3 .5 2 .3 * C e n 2 1 st a r S T 4 7 9 ∑ 1 7 7 2 1 1 3 4 0 .7 + 1 9 5 7 5 .7 5 " B o o 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 4 8 0 D u n lo p 1 4 1 1 3 4 1 .7 -5 4 .6 5 .3 5 .3 " C e n 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 4 8 1 T 1 3 4 1 .8 -3 3 .6 5 .5 * C e n 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 4 8 2 A lk a id E ta 1 3 4 7 .5 + 4 9 .3 1 .9 * U m a 2 1 st a r S T 4 8 3 ∑ 1 7 8 5 A D S 9 0 3 1 1 3 4 9 .1 + 2 7 .0 7 .6 3 .4 " B o o 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 4 8 4 2 1 3 4 9 .4 -3 4 .5 4 .2 * C e n 2 1 st a r S T 4 8 5 U p si lo n 1 3 4 9 .5 + 1 5 .8 4 .1 * B o o 2 1 st a r S T 4 8 6 3 k 1 3 5 1 .8 -3 3 .0 4 .5 8 " C e n 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 4 8 7 Z e ta 1 3 5 5 .5 -4 7 .3 2 .6 5 ° C e n 2 1 st a r S T 4 8 8 H a d a r B e ta 1 4 0 3 .8 -6 0 .4 0 .6 * C e n 2 1 st a r S T 4 8 9 P i 1 4 0 6 .4 -2 6 .7 3 .3 * H ya 2 1 st a r S T 4 9 0 K a p p a 1 4 1 2 .9 -1 0 .3 4 .2 * V ir 2 1 st a r S T 4 9 1 K a p p a 1 4 1 3 .5 + 5 1 4 7 4 .4 1 3 " B o o 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 4 9 2 ∑ 1 8 1 9 1 4 1 5 .3 + 0 3 0 8 7 .8 0 .8 " V ir 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e 40 N um be r N am e O th er R A D ec M ag Se p Co n Co de S T 4 9 3 A rc tu ru s A lp h a 1 4 1 5 .7 + 1 9 1 1 0 S te lla r B o o 2 1 st a r S T 4 9 4 Io ta A D S 9 1 9 8 1 4 1 6 .2 + 5 1 .4 4 .9 3 9 " B o o 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 4 9 5 R 1 4 1 6 .6 -5 9 .9 5 .3 * C e n 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 4 9 6 ∑ 1 8 3 4 A D S 9 2 2 9 1 4 2 0 .3 + 4 8 .5 8 .1 1 .3 " B o o 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 4 9 7 ∑ 1 8 3 3 1 4 2 2 .6 -0 7 4 6 7 .6 6 " V ir 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 4 9 8 D u n lo p 1 5 9 1 4 2 2 .6 -5 8 .5 5 9 " C e n 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 4 9 9 ∑ 1 8 3 5 1 4 2 3 .4 + 0 8 2 6 5 .1 6 " B o o 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 5 0 0 S H J 1 7 9 1 4 2 5 .5 -1 9 5 8 6 .4 3 5 " L ib 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 5 0 1 5 A D S 9 2 8 6 1 4 2 7 .5 + 7 5 .7 4 .3 * U m i 2 1 st a r S T 5 0 2 P ro xi m a 1 4 2 9 .9 -6 2 .7 1 0 .7 * C e n 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 5 0 3 R h o A D S 9 2 9 6 1 4 3 1 .8 + 3 0 .4 3 .6 * B o o 2 1 st a r S T 5 0 4 h 4 6 9 0 1 4 3 7 .3 -4 6 0 8 5 .4 1 9 " L u p 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 5 0 5 R ig il K e n ta u ru s A lp h a 1 4 3 9 .6 -6 0 5 0 0 2 0 " C e n 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 5 0 6 P i A D S 9 3 3 8 1 4 4 0 .7 + 1 6 .4 5 5 .6 " B o o 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 5 0 7 ∑ 1 8 6 4 p i 1 4 4 0 .7 + 1 6 2 5 4 .9 6 " B o o 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 5 0 8 Z e ta 1 4 4 1 .1 + 1 3 4 4 3 .8 1 " B o o 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 5 0 9 A lp h a 1 4 4 1 .9 -4 7 .4 2 .3 * L u p 2 1 st a r S T 5 1 0 q 1 4 4 2 .0 -3 7 .8 4 * C e n 2 1 st a r S T 5 1 1 A lp h a D u n lo p 1 6 6 1 4 4 2 .5 -6 5 .0 3 .2 1 6 " C ir 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 5 1 2 c1 1 4 4 3 .7 -3 5 .2 4 1 7 ' C e n 2 1 st a r S T 5 1 3 Iz a r E p si lo n 1 4 4 5 .0 + 2 7 0 4 2 .4 3 " B o o 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 5 1 4 D u n lo p D u n lo p 1 6 9 1 4 4 5 .2 -5 5 .6 6 .2 6 8 " C ir 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 5 1 5 5 4 H 9 7 1 4 4 6 .0 -2 5 2 6 5 .2 8 " H ya 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 5 1 6 A lp h a 1 4 4 7 .9 -7 9 .0 3 .8 1 0 ° A p s 2 1 st a r S T 5 1 7 ∑ 1 8 8 3 1 4 4 8 .9 + 0 5 5 7 7 .6 0 .7 " V ir 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 5 1 8 M u 1 4 4 9 .3 -1 4 0 9 5 .4 2 " L ib 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 5 1 9 3 9 1 4 4 9 .7 + 4 8 4 3 5 .7 3 " B o o 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 5 2 0 5 8 1 4 5 0 .3 -2 8 .0 4 .4 * H ya 2 1 st a r S T 5 2 1 K o ch a b B e ta 1 4 5 0 .7 + 7 4 .2 2 .1 * U m i 2 1 st a r S T 5 2 2 Z u b e n e lg e n u b i A lp h a 1 4 5 0 .9 -1 6 .0 2 .8 4 ' L ib 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 5 2 3 X i 3 7 1 4 5 1 .4 + 1 9 0 6 4 .6 7 " B o o 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 5 2 4 h 4 7 1 5 1 4 5 6 .5 -4 7 .9 6 2 .4 " L u p 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 5 2 5 3 3 H 2 8 1 4 5 7 .3 -2 1 2 2 5 .9 2 3 " L ib 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 5 2 6 B e ta 1 4 5 8 .5 -4 3 .1 2 .6 * L u p 2 1 st a r S T 5 2 7 P i 1 5 0 1 .8 -8 3 .2 5 .7 1 8 ' O ct 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 5 2 8 4 4 1 5 0 3 .8 + 4 7 3 9 4 .8 1 .5 " B o o 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 5 2 9 S ig m a 1 5 0 4 .1 -2 5 .3 3 .2 * L ib 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 5 3 0 D u n lo p 1 7 8 1 5 1 1 .6 -4 5 .3 6 .7 3 2 " L u p 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 5 3 1 K a p p a D u n lo p 1 7 7 1 5 1 1 .9 -4 8 .7 3 .9 2 7 " L u p 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 5 3 2 X 1 5 1 4 .3 -7 0 .1 8 .1 * Tr a 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 5 3 3 ∑ 1 9 3 2 1 5 1 8 .3 + 2 6 5 0 6 .6 1 .5 " C rB 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 5 3 4 M u h 4 7 5 3 1 5 1 8 .5 -4 7 .9 5 .1 1 .2 " L u p 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 5 3 5 ∑ 1 9 3 1 1 5 1 8 .7 + 1 0 2 6 7 1 3 " S e r 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 5 3 6 S 1 5 2 1 .4 + 3 1 .4 5 .8 * C rb 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 5 3 7 P h i1 1 5 2 1 .8 -3 6 .3 3 .6 5 0 ' L u p 2 1 st a r S T 5 3 8 E ta 1 5 2 3 .2 + 3 0 1 7 5 .6 1 .0 " C rB 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 5 3 9 M u 1 5 2 4 .5 + 3 7 2 3 4 .3 2 " B o o 6 tr ip le s ta r S T 5 4 0 E d a si ch Io ta 1 5 2 4 .9 + 5 9 .0 3 .3 * D ra 2 1 st a r S T 5 4 1 ∑ 1 9 7 2 P i 1 5 2 9 .2 + 8 0 2 6 6 .9 3 1 " U m i 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 5 4 2 L a l1 2 3 1 5 3 3 .1 -2 4 2 9 7 .5 9 " L ib 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 5 4 3 ∑ 1 9 5 4 D e lt a 1 5 3 4 .8 + 1 0 .5 4 3 .9 " S e r 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 5 4 4 G a m m a 1 5 3 5 .1 -4 1 .2 2 .8 * L u p 2 1 st a r S T 5 4 5 h 4 7 8 8 d 1 5 3 5 .9 -4 5 .0 4 .7 2 .2 " L u p 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 5 4 6 U p si lo n A D S 9 7 0 5 1 5 3 7 .0 -2 8 .1 3 .6 3 " L ib 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 5 4 7 O m e g a 1 5 3 8 .1 -4 2 .6 4 .3 * L u p 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r 41 N um be r N am e O th er R A D ec M ag Se p Co n Co de S T 5 4 8 ∑ 1 9 6 2 1 5 3 8 .7 -0 8 4 7 5 .8 1 2 " L ib 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 5 4 9 Ta u 4 0 1 5 3 8 .7 -2 9 .8 3 .7 2 ° L ib 2 1 st a r S T 5 5 0 ∑ 1 9 6 5 Z e ta 1 5 3 9 .4 + 3 6 .6 5 6 .3 " C rb 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 5 5 1 ∑ 1 9 6 7 G a m m a 1 5 4 2 .7 + 2 6 .3 4 .2 0 .3 " C rb 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 5 5 2 U n u ka lh a i A lp h a 1 5 4 4 .3 + 0 6 .4 2 .7 * S e r 2 1 st a r S T 5 5 3 R V 1 5 4 8 .6 + 2 8 0 9 5 .7 S te lla r C rB 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 5 5 4 K a p p a 3 5 1 5 4 8 .7 + 1 8 .1 4 .1 * S e r 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 5 5 5 R 1 5 5 0 .7 + 1 5 .1 5 .2 * S e r 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 5 5 6 X i 1 5 5 6 .9 -3 3 5 8 5 .2 1 0 " L u p 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 5 5 7 R h o 5 1 5 5 6 .9 -2 9 .2 3 .9 * S co 2 1 st a r S T 5 5 8 E p si lo n 1 3 1 5 5 7 .6 + 2 6 .9 4 .2 * C rb 2 1 st a r S T 5 5 9 P i 6 1 5 5 8 .9 -2 6 .1 2 .9 * S co 2 1 st a r S T 5 6 0 T V 1 5 5 9 .5 + 2 5 5 5 2 S te lla r C rB 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 5 6 1 E ta R m k 2 1 1 6 0 0 .1 -3 8 2 4 3 .6 1 5 " L u p 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 5 6 2 D e lt a 7 1 6 0 0 .3 -2 2 .6 2 .3 * S co 2 1 st a r S T 5 6 3 X i 1 6 0 4 .4 -1 1 2 2 4 .2 1 " S co 8 tr ip le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 5 6 4 G ra ff ia s B e ta 1 6 0 5 .4 -1 9 .8 2 .5 * S co 2 1 st a r S T 5 6 5 O m e g a 1 9 1 6 0 6 .8 -2 0 .7 4 1 4 ' S co 2 1 st a r S T 5 6 6 K a p p a 1 6 0 8 .1 + 1 7 0 3 5 2 8 " H e r 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 5 6 7 N u 1 6 1 2 .0 -1 9 2 8 4 1 " S co 7 q u a d ru p le s ta r S T 5 6 8 Ye d P ri o r D e lt a 1 6 1 4 .3 -0 3 .7 2 .7 * O p h 2 1 st a r S T 5 6 9 ∑ 2 0 3 2 "1 7 , S ig m a " 1 6 1 4 .7 + 3 3 5 2 5 .2 7 " C rB 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 5 7 0 D e lt a 1 6 2 0 .3 -7 8 .7 4 .7 * A p s 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 5 7 1 S ig m a H 1 2 1 1 6 2 1 .2 -2 5 3 5 2 .9 2 0 " S co 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 5 7 2 R h o A D S 1 0 0 4 9 1 6 2 5 .6 -2 3 .5 5 .3 3 .1 " O p h 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 5 7 3 V 1 6 2 6 .7 -1 2 .4 7 .3 * O p h 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 5 7 4 E p si lo n h 4 8 5 3 1 6 2 7 .2 -4 7 .6 4 .8 2 3 " N o r 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 5 7 5 Io ta D u n lo p 2 0 1 1 6 2 8 .0 -6 4 .1 5 .3 2 0 " Tr a 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 5 7 6 ∑ 2 0 5 2 A D S 1 0 0 7 5 1 6 2 8 .9 + 1 8 .4 7 .7 1 .7 " H e r 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 5 7 7 A n ta re s A lp h a 1 6 2 9 .4 -2 6 .4 1 3 " S co 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 5 7 8 L a m b d a A D S 1 0 0 8 7 1 6 3 0 .9 + 0 2 .0 4 .2 1 .4 " O p h 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 5 7 9 R 1 6 3 2 .7 + 6 6 .8 6 .7 * D ra 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 5 8 0 1 6 1 6 3 6 .2 + 5 2 5 5 5 .1 3 " D ra 6 tr ip le s ta r S T 5 8 1 H 1 6 3 6 .4 -3 5 .3 4 .2 * S co 2 1 st a r S T 5 8 2 Z e ta 1 3 1 6 3 7 .2 -1 0 .6 2 .6 * O p h 2 1 st a r S T 5 8 3 S U 1 6 4 0 .6 -3 2 .4 8 * S co 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 5 8 4 Z e ta A D S 1 0 1 5 7 1 6 4 1 .3 + 3 1 .6 3 1 .4 " H e r 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 5 8 5 A tr ia A lp h a 1 6 4 8 .7 -6 9 .0 1 .9 * Tr a 2 1 st a r S T 5 8 6 E ta 1 6 4 9 .8 -5 9 .0 3 .8 * A ra 2 1 st a r S T 5 8 7 E p si lo n 2 6 1 6 5 0 .2 -3 4 .3 2 .3 * S co 2 1 st a r S T 5 8 8 M u 1 6 5 2 .3 -3 8 .0 3 * S co 2 1 st a r S T 5 8 9 ∑ 2 1 1 8 2 0 1 6 5 6 .4 + 6 5 .0 7 .1 1 .4 " D ra 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 5 9 0 R R 1 6 5 6 .6 -3 0 .6 5 .1 * S co 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 5 9 1 K a p p a 2 7 1 6 5 7 .7 + 0 9 .4 3 .2 7 5 ' O p h 2 1 st a r S T 5 9 2 Z e ta 1 6 5 8 .6 -5 6 .0 3 .1 * A ra 2 1 st a r S T 5 9 3 E p si lo n 1 1 6 5 9 .6 -5 3 .2 4 .1 4 0 ' A ra 2 1 st a r S T 5 9 4 M u 1 7 0 5 .3 + 5 4 2 8 4 .9 2 " D ra 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 5 9 5 S a b ik E ta 1 7 1 0 .4 -1 5 .7 2 .4 0 .6 " O p h 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 5 9 6 R a sa lg e th i A lp h a 1 7 1 4 .6 + 1 4 .4 3 4 .6 " H e r 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 5 9 7 D e lt a 1 7 1 5 .0 + 2 4 5 0 3 .2 1 0 " H e r 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 5 9 8 P i 6 7 1 7 1 5 .0 + 3 6 .8 3 .2 7 ° H e r 2 1 st a r S T 5 9 9 3 6 1 7 1 5 .3 -2 6 3 6 4 .3 5 " O p h 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 6 0 0 3 9 1 7 1 8 .0 -2 4 1 7 5 .2 1 0 " O p h 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 6 0 1 T h e ta 4 2 1 7 2 2 .0 -2 5 .0 3 .3 * O p h 2 1 st a r S T 6 0 2 ∑ 2 1 6 1 "7 5 , R h o " 1 7 2 3 .7 + 3 7 0 9 4 .2 4 " H e r 2 d o u b le s ta r 42 N um be r N am e O th er R A D ec M ag Se p Co n Co de S T 6 0 3 B e ta 1 7 2 5 .3 -5 5 .5 2 .9 * A ra 2 1 st a r S T 6 0 4 G a m m a 1 7 2 5 .4 -5 6 .4 3 .3 * A ra 2 1 st a r S T 6 0 5 S ig m a 4 9 1 7 2 6 .5 + 0 4 .1 4 .3 4 ° O p h 2 1 st a r S T 6 0 6 h 4 9 4 9 D u n lo p 2 1 6 1 7 2 6 .9 -4 5 .9 6 2 .2 " A ra 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 6 0 7 ∑ 2 1 7 3 1 7 3 0 .4 -0 1 0 4 6 1 .1 " O p h 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 6 0 8 L a m b d a 7 6 1 7 3 0 .7 + 2 6 .1 4 .4 * H e r 2 1 st a r S T 6 0 9 L e sa th U p si lo n 1 7 3 0 .8 -3 7 .3 2 .7 * S co 2 1 st a r S T 6 1 0 A lp h a 1 7 3 1 .8 -4 9 .9 3 * A ra 2 1 st a r S T 6 1 1 N u 1 7 3 2 .2 + 5 5 1 1 4 .9 6 2 " D ra 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 6 1 2 S h a u la L a m b d a 1 7 3 3 .6 -3 7 .1 1 .6 3 5 ' S co 2 1 st a r S T 6 1 3 R a sa lh a g u e A lp h a 1 7 3 4 .9 + 1 2 3 4 2 .1 * O p h 2 1 st a r S T 6 1 4 Io ta 8 5 1 7 3 9 .5 + 4 6 .0 3 .8 * H e r 2 1 st a r S T 6 1 5 ∑ 2 2 4 1 P si 1 7 4 1 .9 + 7 2 0 9 4 .9 3 0 " D ra 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 6 1 6 K a p p a 1 7 4 2 .5 -3 9 .0 2 .4 2 .5 ° S co 2 1 st a r S T 6 1 7 V 1 7 4 3 .3 -5 7 .7 5 .7 * P a v 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 6 1 8 C e b a lr a i B e ta 1 7 4 3 .5 + 0 4 .6 2 .8 * O p h 2 1 st a r S T 6 1 9 ∑ 2 2 0 2 6 1 1 7 4 4 .6 + 0 2 3 4 6 .2 2 1 " O p h 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 6 2 0 S Z 1 7 4 5 .0 -1 8 .6 9 * S g r 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 6 2 1 S X 1 7 4 7 .5 -3 5 .7 8 .5 * S co 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 6 2 2 G 1 7 4 9 .9 -3 7 .0 3 .2 2 ° S co 2 1 st a r S T 6 2 3 Y 1 7 5 2 .6 -0 6 .2 6 * O p h 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 6 2 4 G ru m iu m X i 1 7 5 3 .5 + 5 6 .9 3 .8 * D ra 2 1 st a r S T 6 2 5 E lt a n in G a m m a 1 7 5 6 .6 + 5 1 .5 2 .2 * D ra 2 1 st a r S T 6 2 6 B a rn a rd s S ta r 1 7 5 7 .8 + 0 4 3 4 9 .5 S te lla r O p h 2 1 st a r S T 6 2 7 h 5 0 0 3 1 7 5 9 .1 -3 0 1 5 5 6 " S g r 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 6 2 8 ∑ 2 0 3 8 4 0 -4 1 1 8 0 0 .0 + 8 0 .0 5 .7 2 0 " D ra 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 6 2 9 9 5 1 8 0 1 .5 + 2 1 3 6 4 .3 6 " H e r 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 6 3 0 Ta u A D S 1 1 0 0 5 1 8 0 3 .1 -0 8 .2 5 .2 1 .8 " O p h 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 6 3 1 ∑ 2 2 7 6 7 0 1 8 0 5 .5 + 0 2 3 0 4 1 .5 " O p h 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 6 3 2 T h e ta 1 8 0 6 .6 -5 0 .1 3 .7 * A ra 2 1 st a r S T 6 3 3 ∑ 2 2 8 0 1 0 0 1 8 0 7 .8 + 2 6 0 6 5 .9 1 4 " H e r 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 6 3 4 W 1 8 1 4 .9 + 3 6 .7 7 .3 * Ly r 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 6 3 5 E ta 1 8 1 7 .6 -3 6 .8 3 .1 * S g r 2 1 st a r S T 6 3 6 K a p p a 1 1 8 1 9 .9 + 3 6 .1 4 .3 * Ly r 2 1 st a r S T 6 3 7 K a u s M e d ia D e lt a 1 8 2 1 .0 -2 9 .8 2 .7 * S g r 2 1 st a r S T 6 3 8 ∑ 2 3 0 6 1 8 2 2 .2 -1 5 0 5 7 .9 1 0 " S ct 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 6 3 9 X i G a le 2 1 8 2 3 .2 -6 1 .5 4 .4 * P a v 2 1 st a r S T 6 4 0 ∑ 2 3 2 3 3 9 1 8 2 4 .0 + 5 8 4 8 4 .9 4 " D ra 6 tr ip le s ta r S T 6 4 1 2 1 A D S 1 1 3 2 5 1 8 2 5 .3 -2 0 .5 4 .9 1 .8 " S g r 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 6 4 2 A lp h a 1 8 2 7 .0 -4 6 .0 3 .5 6 ' Te l 2 1 st a r S T 6 4 3 5 9 1 8 2 7 .2 + 0 0 1 2 5 .2 4 " S e r 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 6 4 4 K a u s B o re a lis L a m b d a 1 8 2 8 .0 -2 5 .4 2 .8 * S g r 2 1 st a r S T 6 4 5 S S 1 8 3 0 .4 -1 6 .9 9 * S g r 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 6 4 6 D e lt a 1 8 3 1 .8 -4 5 .9 5 1 1 ' Te l 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 6 4 7 T 1 8 3 2 .3 + 3 7 .0 7 .8 * Ly r 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 6 4 8 ∆ 2 2 2 K a p p a 1 8 3 3 .4 -3 8 4 4 5 .9 2 1 " C rA 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 6 4 9 ∑ 2 3 4 8 1 8 3 3 .9 + 5 2 1 8 6 2 6 " D ra 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 6 5 0 A lp h a 1 8 3 5 .2 -0 8 .2 3 .9 * S ct 2 1 st a r S T 6 5 1 O ∑ 3 5 9 1 8 3 5 .5 + 2 3 3 6 6 .3 0 .7 " H e r 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 6 5 2 O ∑ 3 5 8 A D S 1 1 4 8 3 1 8 3 5 .9 + 1 7 .0 6 .8 1 .6 " H e r 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 6 5 3 V e g a A lp h a 1 8 3 6 .9 + 3 8 4 7 0 S te lla r Ly r 2 1 st a r S T 6 5 4 X 1 8 3 8 .3 + 0 8 .8 5 .9 * O p h 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 6 5 5 H K 1 8 4 2 .8 + 3 7 .0 9 .5 * Ly r 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 6 5 6 ∑ 2 3 9 8 1 8 4 3 .0 + 5 9 .6 8 1 3 " D ra 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 6 5 7 D o u b le -D o u b le E p si lo n 1 8 4 4 .3 + 3 9 4 0 4 .7 2 " Ly r 7 q u a d ru p le s ta r 43 N um be r N am e O th er R A D ec M ag Se p Co n Co de S T 6 5 8 Z e ta 1 8 4 4 .8 + 3 7 3 6 4 .4 4 4 " Ly r 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 6 5 9 ∑ 2 3 7 5 1 8 4 5 .5 + 0 5 3 0 6 .2 2 " S e r 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 6 6 0 ∑ 2 3 7 9 5 1 8 4 6 .5 -0 0 5 8 5 .8 1 3 " A q l 6 tr ip le s ta r S T 6 6 1 R V 1 8 4 7 .5 -0 5 4 2 4 .5 S te lla r S ct 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 6 6 2 B e ta 1 8 5 0 .0 + 3 3 2 4 3 .5 4 7 " Ly r 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 6 6 3 S A D S 1 1 7 2 6 1 8 5 0 .3 -0 7 .9 6 .8 1 4 .3 " S ct 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 6 6 4 ∑ 2 4 0 4 1 8 5 0 .8 + 1 0 5 9 6 .9 4 " A q l 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 6 6 5 ∑ 2 4 2 0 O m ic ro n 1 8 5 1 .2 + 5 9 2 2 4 .9 3 5 " D ra 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 6 6 6 D e lt a 2 A D S 1 1 8 2 5 1 8 5 4 .5 + 3 6 .9 4 .5 * C yg 2 1 st a r S T 6 6 7 O ∑ 5 2 5 1 8 5 4 .9 + 3 3 5 8 6 4 5 " Ly r 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 6 6 8 N u n ki S ig m a 1 8 5 5 .3 -2 6 .3 2 * S g r 2 1 st a r S T 6 6 9 1 3 R 1 8 5 5 .3 + 4 3 .9 3 .9 4 " Ly r 2 1 st a r S T 6 7 0 ∑ 2 4 1 7 "6 3 , T h e ta " 1 8 5 6 .3 + 0 4 1 1 4 .1 2 2 " S e r 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 6 7 1 A D S 1 1 8 7 1 1 8 5 7 .0 + 3 2 .9 5 .4 1 " Ly r 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 6 7 2 ∑ 2 4 2 2 A D S 1 1 8 6 9 1 8 5 7 .1 + 2 6 .1 8 0 .7 " Ly r 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 6 7 3 U V 1 8 5 8 .6 + 1 4 .4 8 .6 * A q l 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 6 7 4 ∑ 2 4 2 6 1 9 0 0 .0 + 1 2 5 3 7 .1 1 7 " A q l 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 6 7 5 B rs O 1 4 1 9 0 1 .1 -3 7 0 3 6 .6 1 3 " C ra 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 6 7 6 h 5 0 8 2 1 9 0 3 .1 -1 9 1 4 6 7 " S g r 6 tr ip le s ta r S T 6 7 7 V R V 1 9 0 4 .4 -0 5 4 1 6 .6 S te lla r A q l 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 6 7 8 1 5 1 9 0 5 .0 -0 4 0 2 5 .4 3 8 " A q l 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 6 7 9 G a m m a 1 9 0 6 .4 -3 7 0 0 5 3 " A q l 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 6 8 0 R R V 1 9 0 6 .4 + 0 8 1 4 5 .5 S te lla r A q l 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 6 8 1 ∑ 2 4 4 9 1 9 0 6 .4 + 0 7 0 9 7 .2 8 " A q l 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 6 8 2 ∑ 2 4 7 4 1 9 0 9 .1 + 3 4 3 5 6 .5 1 6 " Ly r 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 6 8 3 ∑ 2 4 8 6 1 9 1 2 .1 + 4 9 5 1 6 .6 8 " C yg 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 6 8 4 O ∑ 1 7 8 1 9 1 5 .3 + 1 5 .1 5 .7 9 0 " A q l 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 6 8 5 Ta u 6 0 1 9 1 5 .5 + 7 3 .4 4 .5 * D ra 2 1 st a r S T 6 8 6 R Y 1 9 1 6 .5 -3 3 .5 6 * S g r 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 6 8 7 U V 1 9 1 8 .8 + 1 9 3 7 6 .6 S te lla r S g e 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 6 8 8 V 1 9 4 2 1 9 1 9 .2 -1 5 .9 6 .4 * S g r 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 6 8 9 U X R V 1 9 2 1 .6 + 7 6 3 4 5 .9 S te lla r D ra 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 6 9 0 R R V 1 9 2 5 .5 + 4 2 4 7 7 .1 S te lla r Ly r 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 6 9 1 ∑ 2 5 2 5 A D S 1 2 4 4 7 1 9 2 6 .6 + 2 7 .3 8 .1 2 " V u l 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 6 9 2 h 5 1 1 4 1 9 2 7 .8 -5 4 .3 5 .7 7 0 " Te l 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 6 9 3 A lp h a 6 1 9 2 8 .7 + 2 4 .7 4 .4 * V u l 2 1 st a r S T 6 9 4 A lb ir e o B e ta 1 9 3 0 .7 + 2 8 .0 3 3 5 " C yg 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 6 9 5 M u 3 8 1 9 3 4 .1 + 0 7 .4 4 .5 * A q l 2 1 st a r S T 6 9 6 A Q 1 9 3 4 .3 -1 6 .4 9 .1 * S g r 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 6 9 7 R 1 9 3 6 .8 + 5 0 .2 6 .1 * C yg 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 6 9 8 H N 8 4 1 9 3 9 .4 + 1 6 3 4 6 .4 2 8 " S g e 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 6 9 9 5 4 A D S 1 2 7 6 7 1 9 4 0 .7 -1 6 .3 5 .4 3 8 " S g r 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 7 0 0 T T 1 9 4 0 .9 + 3 2 .6 7 .8 * C yg 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 7 0 1 1 6 1 9 4 1 .8 + 5 0 3 2 6 3 9 " C yg 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 7 0 2 ∑ 2 5 7 9 "1 8 , D e lt a " 1 9 4 5 .0 + 4 5 0 8 2 .9 2 " C yg 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 7 0 3 O ∑ ∑ 1 9 1 H V 1 3 7 1 9 4 5 .9 + 3 5 0 1 6 3 9 " C yg 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 7 0 4 Ta ra ze d G a m m a 1 9 4 6 .3 + 1 0 .6 2 .7 * A q l 2 1 st a r S T 7 0 5 ∑ 2 5 8 0 1 7 1 9 4 6 .4 + 3 3 4 4 5 2 6 " C yg 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 7 0 6 D e lt a 7 1 9 4 7 .4 + 1 8 .5 3 .8 * S g e 2 1 st a r S T 7 0 7 E p si lo n 1 9 4 8 .2 + 7 0 1 6 3 .8 3 " D ra 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 7 0 8 ∑ 2 5 8 3 P i 1 9 4 8 .7 + 1 1 .8 6 .1 1 .4 " A q l 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 7 0 9 Z e ta 1 9 4 9 .0 + 1 9 0 9 5 9 " S g e 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 7 1 0 C h i V 1 9 5 0 .6 + 3 2 5 5 3 .3 S te lla r C yg 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 7 1 1 A lt a ir A lp h a 1 9 5 0 .8 + 0 8 5 2 0 .8 * A q l 2 1 st a r S T 7 1 2 E ta 5 5 1 9 5 2 .5 + 0 1 .0 3 .4 * A q l 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r 44 N um be r N am e O th er R A D ec M ag Se p Co n Co de S T 7 1 3 5 7 1 9 5 4 .6 -0 8 1 4 5 .7 3 6 " A q l 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 7 1 4 O ∑ 5 3 2 B e ta 1 9 5 5 .3 + 0 6 .4 3 .7 1 3 " A q l 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 7 1 5 P si 1 9 5 5 .6 + 5 2 2 6 4 .9 3 " C yg 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 7 1 6 R R 1 9 5 5 .9 -2 9 .2 5 .4 * S g r 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 7 1 7 R U 1 9 5 8 .7 -4 1 .9 6 * S g r 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 7 1 8 G a m m a 1 2 1 9 5 8 .8 + 1 9 .5 3 .5 * S g e 2 1 st a r S T 7 1 9 B F 2 0 0 2 .4 + 2 1 .1 8 .5 * S g e 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 7 2 0 h 1 4 7 0 2 0 0 3 .6 + 3 8 1 9 7 .6 2 9 " C yg 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 7 2 1 X 2 0 0 5 .1 + 2 0 .7 7 * S g e 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 7 2 2 W Z 2 0 0 7 .6 + 1 7 .7 7 * S g e 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 7 2 3 ∑ 2 6 7 5 K a p p a 2 0 0 8 .9 + 7 7 4 3 4 .4 7 " C e p 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 7 2 4 ∑ 2 6 3 7 T h e ta 2 0 0 9 .9 + 2 0 5 5 6 .4 1 2 " S g e 6 tr ip le s ta r S T 7 2 5 R Y 2 0 1 0 .4 + 3 6 .0 8 .5 * C yg 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 7 2 6 F G 2 0 1 1 .9 + 2 0 .3 9 .5 * S g e 3 5 p la n e ta ry n e b u la i rr e g u la r S T 7 2 7 ∑ 2 6 4 4 2 0 1 2 .6 + 0 0 5 2 6 .8 3 " A q l 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 7 2 8 R S 2 0 1 3 .4 + 3 8 .7 6 .5 * C yg 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 7 2 9 ∑ 2 6 5 8 2 0 1 3 .6 + 5 3 0 7 7 .1 5 " C yg 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 7 3 0 O m ic ro n 1 "A D S 1 3 5 5 4 , V 6 9 5 " 2 0 1 3 .6 + 4 6 .7 3 .8 * C yg 2 1 st a r S T 7 3 1 R T 2 0 1 7 .1 -2 1 .3 8 .9 * C a p 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 7 3 2 A lp h a 2 0 1 7 .6 -1 2 .5 4 .2 4 4 " C a p 2 1 st a r S T 7 3 3 R T 2 0 1 7 .7 -3 9 .1 6 * S g r 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 7 3 4 P 2 0 1 7 .8 + 3 8 0 2 3 S te lla r C yg 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 7 3 5 A lp h a 2 0 1 8 .0 -1 2 3 2 3 .8 7 " C a p 7 q u a d ru p le s ta r S T 7 3 6 ∑ 2 6 7 1 2 0 1 8 .4 + 5 5 2 3 6 4 " C yg 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 7 3 7 U 2 0 1 9 .6 + 4 7 .9 5 .9 * C yg 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 7 3 8 D a b ih B e ta 2 0 2 1 .0 -1 4 .8 3 .4 3 ' C a p 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 7 3 9 3 9 3 9 2 0 2 3 .9 + 3 2 .2 4 .4 * C yg 2 1 st a r S T 7 4 0 P e a co ck A lp h a 2 0 2 5 .6 -5 6 .7 1 .9 * P a v 2 1 st a r S T 7 4 1 p i 2 0 2 7 .3 -1 8 1 3 5 .3 3 " C a p 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 7 4 2 O m ic ro n S H J 3 2 4 2 0 2 9 .9 -1 8 3 5 6 .1 1 9 " C a p 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 7 4 3 ∑ 2 7 1 6 4 9 2 0 4 1 .0 + 3 2 1 8 5 .5 3 " C yg 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 7 4 4 V 2 0 4 1 .3 + 4 8 .2 7 .7 * C yg 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 7 4 5 D e n e b A lp h a 2 0 4 1 .4 + 4 5 1 7 1 .3 * C yg 2 1 st a r S T 7 4 6 ∑ 2 7 2 6 5 2 2 0 4 5 .7 + 3 0 .7 4 .2 6 " C yg 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 7 4 7 G a m m a 2 0 4 6 .7 + 1 6 0 7 4 .3 1 0 " D e l 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 7 4 8 L a m b d a A D S 1 4 2 9 6 2 0 4 7 .4 + 3 6 .5 4 .9 0 .9 " C yg 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 7 4 9 3 2 0 4 7 .7 -0 5 .0 4 .4 * A q r 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 7 5 0 S 7 6 3 2 0 4 8 .4 -1 8 1 1 6 .7 1 6 " C a p 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 7 5 1 4 A D S 1 4 3 6 0 2 0 5 1 .4 -0 5 .6 6 .4 0 .8 " A q r 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 7 5 2 O m e g a 1 8 2 0 5 1 .8 -2 6 .9 4 .1 * C a p 2 1 st a r S T 7 5 3 E p si lo n 1 2 0 5 9 .1 + 0 4 1 8 5 .2 1 " E q u 8 tr ip le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 7 5 4 ∑ 2 7 5 1 A D S 1 4 5 7 5 2 1 0 2 .1 + 5 6 .7 6 .1 1 .5 " C e p 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 7 5 5 ∑ 2 7 4 2 2 2 1 0 2 .2 + 0 7 1 1 7 .4 3 " E q u 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 7 5 6 D u n lo p 2 3 6 2 1 0 2 .2 -4 3 .0 6 5 7 " M ic 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 7 5 7 L a m b d a A D S 1 4 5 5 6 2 1 0 2 .2 + 0 7 .2 7 .4 3 " E q u 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 7 5 8 1 2 2 1 0 4 .1 -0 5 4 9 5 .9 3 " A q r 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 7 5 9 X i 6 2 2 1 0 4 .9 + 4 3 .9 3 .7 * C yg 2 1 st a r S T 7 6 0 ∑ 2 7 5 8 6 1 2 1 0 6 .9 + 3 8 3 9 5 .2 2 9 " C yg 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 7 6 1 2 4 A D S 1 4 6 3 2 2 1 0 7 .1 -2 5 .0 4 .5 * C a p 3 9 st e lla r p la n e ta ry n e b u la S T 7 6 2 T 2 1 0 9 .5 + 6 8 .5 5 .2 * C e p 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 7 6 3 G a m m a 2 1 1 0 .3 + 1 0 .1 4 .7 6 ' E q u 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 7 6 4 ∑ 2 7 8 0 A D S 1 4 7 4 9 2 1 1 1 .8 + 6 0 .0 5 .6 1 .0 " C e p 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 7 6 5 D e lt a 2 1 1 4 .5 + 1 0 0 0 4 .6 4 8 " E q u 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 7 6 6 T h e ta h 5 2 5 8 2 1 1 9 .9 -5 3 .5 4 .5 6 " In d 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 7 6 7 R Y 2 1 2 0 .3 -1 0 .8 8 * A q r 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r 45 N um be r N am e O th er R A D ec M ag Se p Co n Co de S T 7 6 8 Y 2 1 2 4 .3 -6 9 .7 8 .6 * P a v 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 7 6 9 B e ta 2 1 2 8 .7 + 7 0 3 3 3 .3 1 3 " C e p 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 7 7 0 S R V 2 1 3 5 .2 + 7 8 3 7 7 .4 S te lla r C e p 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 7 7 1 ∑ 2 8 1 6 2 1 3 9 .0 + 5 7 2 9 5 .6 1 2 " C e p 6 tr ip le s ta r S T 7 7 2 V 4 6 0 2 1 4 2 .0 + 3 5 .5 5 .6 * C yg 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 7 7 3 S S 2 1 4 2 .7 + 4 3 3 5 8 .2 S te lla r C yg 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 7 7 4 R V 2 1 4 3 .3 + 3 8 .0 7 .1 * C yg 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 7 7 5 H e rs ch e l's G a rn e t S ta r M u 2 1 4 3 .5 + 5 8 4 7 3 .4 S te lla r C e p 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 7 7 6 E p si lo n 2 1 4 4 .2 + 0 9 5 2 2 .5 8 3 " P e g 9 d o u b le s ta r m a g n it u d e c o n tr a st S T 7 7 7 L a m b d a h 5 2 7 8 2 1 5 0 .9 -8 2 .7 5 .4 3 " O ct 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 7 7 8 A G 2 1 5 1 .0 + 1 2 .6 6 * P e g 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 7 7 9 ∑ 2 8 4 0 2 1 5 2 .0 + 5 5 4 7 5 .5 1 8 " C e p 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 7 8 0 ∑ 2 8 4 1 A D S 1 5 4 3 1 2 1 5 4 .3 + 1 9 .7 6 .4 2 2 " P e g 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 7 8 1 R X 2 1 5 6 .4 + 2 2 .9 8 * P e g 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 7 8 2 ∑ 2 8 7 3 2 1 5 8 .4 + 8 2 5 1 7 .1 1 4 " C e p 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 7 8 3 E ta ß 2 7 6 2 2 0 0 .8 -2 8 2 7 5 .8 1 .9 " P sa 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 7 8 4 2 9 S 8 0 2 2 2 0 2 .5 -1 6 5 8 7 .2 4 " A q r 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 7 8 5 ∑ 2 8 6 3 "1 7 , X i" 2 2 0 3 .8 + 6 4 3 8 4 .3 8 " C e p 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 7 8 6 O ∑ 4 6 1 A D S 1 5 6 0 1 2 2 0 3 .9 + 5 9 .8 6 .7 1 1 .1 " C e p 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 7 8 7 L a m b d a 2 2 0 6 .1 -3 9 .5 4 .5 * G ru 2 1 st a r S T 7 8 8 A l N a ir A lp h a 2 2 0 8 .2 -4 6 5 8 1 .7 S te lla r G ru 2 1 st a r S T 7 8 9 ∑ 2 8 8 3 2 2 1 0 .7 + 7 0 0 7 5 .7 1 5 " C e p 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 7 9 0 Z e ta 2 2 1 0 .9 + 5 8 .2 3 .4 * C e p 2 1 st a r S T 7 9 1 h 1 7 4 6 A D S 1 5 7 5 8 2 2 1 3 .9 + 3 9 .7 4 .5 2 8 " L a c 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 7 9 2 4 1 2 2 1 4 .3 -2 1 0 4 5 .3 5 " A q r 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 7 9 3 1 2 2 1 6 .0 + 3 7 .7 4 .1 * L a c 2 1 st a r S T 7 9 4 A lp h a 2 2 1 8 .5 -6 0 .3 2 .9 5 ' Tu c 2 1 st a r S T 7 9 5 ∑ 2 8 9 4 2 2 1 8 .9 + 3 7 4 6 6 .1 1 6 " L a c 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 7 9 6 P i 2 2 2 3 .1 -4 5 .9 5 .8 2 .7 " G ru 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 7 9 7 S 2 2 2 6 .1 -4 8 .4 6 * G ru 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 7 9 8 5 3 2 2 2 6 .6 -1 6 4 5 6 .4 3 " A q r 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 7 9 9 D e lt a h 5 3 3 4 2 2 2 7 .3 -6 5 .0 4 .5 7 " Tu c 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 8 0 0 K ru g e r6 0 A D S 1 5 9 7 2 2 2 2 8 .1 + 5 7 .7 9 .8 3 " C e p 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 8 0 1 Z e ta 2 2 2 8 .8 -0 0 0 1 4 .3 2 " A q r 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 8 0 2 D e lt a 2 2 2 9 .2 + 5 8 2 5 3 .8 2 0 " C e p 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 8 0 3 5 2 2 2 9 .5 + 4 7 .7 4 .4 5 ' L a c 2 1 st a r S T 8 0 4 D e lt a 2 2 2 2 9 .8 -4 3 .7 4 .1 1 5 ' G ru 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 8 0 5 ∑ 2 9 1 2 3 7 2 2 3 0 .0 + 0 4 .4 5 .8 1 " P e g 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 8 0 6 R o e 4 7 2 2 3 2 .5 + 3 9 4 6 5 .8 4 3 " L a c 7 q u a d ru p le s ta r S T 8 0 7 8 2 2 3 5 .9 + 3 9 3 8 6 .5 2 2 " L a c 6 tr ip le s ta r S T 8 0 8 1 1 2 2 4 0 .5 + 4 4 .3 4 .5 * L a c 2 1 st a r S T 8 0 9 B e ta 2 2 4 2 .7 -4 6 .9 2 .1 * G ru 2 1 st a r S T 8 1 0 Ta u 1 6 9 2 2 4 7 .7 -1 4 .1 5 .7 2 3 " A q r 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 8 1 1 ∑ 2 9 4 7 A D S 1 6 2 9 1 2 2 4 9 .0 + 6 8 .6 7 4 .3 " C e p 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 8 1 2 Ta u 2 7 1 2 2 4 9 .6 -1 3 .6 4 4 0 ' A q r 2 1 st a r S T 8 1 3 ∑ 2 9 5 0 A D S 1 6 3 1 7 2 2 5 1 .4 + 6 1 .7 6 .1 1 .7 " C e p 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 8 1 4 h 1 8 2 3 2 2 5 1 .8 + 4 1 1 9 7 .1 8 2 " L a c 7 q u a d ru p le s ta r S T 8 1 5 L a m b d a 7 3 2 2 5 2 .6 -0 7 .6 3 .7 * A q r 2 1 st a r S T 8 1 6 F o m a lh a u t A lp h a 2 2 5 7 .6 -2 9 3 7 1 .2 * P sA 2 1 st a r S T 8 1 7 5 2 A D S 1 6 4 2 8 2 2 5 9 .2 + 1 1 .7 6 .1 0 .7 " P e g 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 8 1 8 S ch e a t B e ta 2 3 0 3 .8 + 2 8 .1 2 .4 * P e g 2 1 st a r S T 8 1 9 D u n lo p 2 4 6 2 3 0 7 .2 -5 0 .7 6 .1 9 " G ru 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 8 2 0 ∑ 2 9 7 8 2 3 0 7 .5 + 3 2 4 9 6 .3 8 " P e g 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 8 2 1 P i A D S 1 6 5 3 8 2 3 0 7 .9 + 7 5 .4 4 .6 1 .2 " C e p 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e S T 8 2 2 P h i 9 0 2 3 1 4 .3 -0 6 .0 4 .2 * A q r 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r 46 N um be r N am e O th er R A D ec M ag Se p Co n Co de S T 8 2 3 P si 3 2 3 1 9 .0 -0 9 .6 5 1 .5 " A q r 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 8 2 4 9 4 2 3 1 9 .1 -1 3 2 8 5 .1 1 3 " A q r 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 8 2 5 D u n lo p 2 4 9 2 3 2 3 .9 -5 3 .8 6 .5 2 7 " G ru 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 8 2 6 9 9 2 3 2 6 .0 -2 0 .6 4 .4 * A q r 2 1 st a r S T 8 2 7 Z 2 3 3 3 .7 + 4 8 4 9 8 S te lla r A n d 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 8 2 8 E rr a i G a m m a 2 3 3 9 .3 + 7 7 .6 3 .2 * C e p 2 1 st a r S T 8 2 9 T h e ta D u n lo p 2 5 1 2 3 3 9 .5 -4 6 .6 6 .6 4 " P h e 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 8 3 0 R 2 3 4 3 .8 -1 5 1 7 5 .8 S te lla r A q r 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 8 3 1 1 0 7 2 3 4 6 .0 -1 8 4 1 5 .3 7 " A q r 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 8 3 2 T X 1 9 2 3 4 6 .4 + 0 3 2 9 6 .9 S te lla r P sc 1 re d v a ri a b le s ta r S T 8 3 3 ∑ 3 0 4 2 2 3 5 1 .8 + 3 7 5 3 7 .8 5 " A n d 3 d o u b le s ta r e q u a l m a g n it u d e S T 8 3 4 L a l1 9 2 2 3 5 4 .4 -2 7 0 3 6 .9 7 " S cl 2 d o u b le s ta r S T 8 3 5 R 2 3 5 8 .4 + 5 1 2 4 4 .7 S te lla r C a s 2 2 va ri a b le s ta r S T 8 3 6 S ig m a 2 3 5 9 .0 + 5 5 4 5 4 .9 3 " C a s 5 co lo re d d o u b le s ta r S T 8 3 7 ∑ 3 0 5 0 2 3 5 9 .5 + 3 3 4 3 6 .6 1 .5 " A n d 4 d o u b le s ta r ch a lle n g e 47 N um be r N am e O th er R A D ec M ag Se p Co n Co de 48 One-Year Limited Warranty This Orion IntelliScope Computerized Object Locator is warranted against defects in materials or workmanship for a period of one year from the date of purchase. This warranty is for the benefit of the original retail purchaser only. During this warranty period Orion Telescopes & Binoculars will repair or replace, at Orion's option, any warranted instrument that proves to be defective, provided it is returned postage paid to: Orion Warranty Repair, 89 Hangar Way, Watsonville, CA 95076. If the product is not registered, proof of pur-chase (such as a copy of the original invoice) is required. This warranty does not apply if, in Orion's judgment, the instrument has been abused, mishandled, or modified, nor does it apply to normal wear and tear. This warranty gives you specific legal rights, and you may also have other rights, which vary from state to state. For further warranty service information, contact: Customer Service Department, Orion Telescopes & Binoculars, 89 Hangar Way, Watsonville, CA 95076; (800) 676-1343. Orion telescopes & Binoculars 89 Hangar Way, Watsonville, Ca 95076 Customer Support Help Line (800) 676-1343 www.Oriontelescopes.com 