Happy Solstice, Early Morning Moon, Taurus, and Little Bear emits Meteors!
By astrogeoguy December 18
(Above: The beautiful Pleiades cluster is a favorite of many stargazers and astronomers. The stars to the right are the seven sisters of Greek mythology, the daughters of Atlas and his wife Plione. Not every star will be visible to the naked eye, but a telescope reveals hundreds of members of this young and nearby cluster.)
Astronomy "Skylights" for the week (from December 18th) by Chris Vaughan. All the times mentioned are Eastern Standard Time. If you are a camp, or a teacher interested in a classroom presentation, a star party, or a guided field trip to a local observatory, please visit www.astrogeo.ca for details.
Happy Holidays, everyone! Or, as astronomers say, "Happy Solstice and Merry Perihelion!"
The first day of winter, also called the Winter Solstice in the northern hemisphere, occurs Wednesday, December 21st at 5:44 am Eastern Time. At that precise moment, the north pole of the Earth's axis of rotation will be tilting directly away from the Sun. Every day, at local noon, the Sun reaches its highest position in the sky for that day. But on the Winter Solstice, that position is the lowest for the entire year, and we receive the shortest amount of daylight. The sunlight that we DO get is diluted because it spread over a larger area, the same way a flashlight beam weakens when shone obliquely at a wall (try it!). 
Fewer hours and weaker sunlight translate into less insolation (received solar energy) and therefore colder temperatures! It is NOT the case, as some people think, that we are colder because we are farther to the Sun (a position called aphelion) –actually, that happens every year in early July! On the contrary, we are approaching our nearest position from the Sun (perihelion), which occurs annually around January 4. For our friends in the southern hemisphere, the Sun will attain its highest noon-time height for the year, and marks the start of their summer. Good news for us, though - after Wednesday, our days start growing longer again!
News
My latest column for Space.com is all about the cool sights in the constellation of Taurus the Bull. You can find it here .
The Moon and Planets
The Moon reaches Last Quarter on Tuesday evening, rising about midnight and lingering into the daytime morning sky. For the remainder of the week, it wanes and rises even later. Sunday (tonight) the Moon will be about a palm's diameter to the lower left (east) of the bright star Regulus in Leo. On Thursday morning from about 2 am local time until the sky gets bright, look eastward for the crescent Moon sitting about four finger widths above the bright, white planet Jupiter. It'll make a pretty picture!
(Above: The old crescent Moon visits Jupiter on Thursday before sunrise, shown here at 2:50 am local time. Jupiter will rise in the east about 2 am all week.)
It's tougher this week, but you can still try to spot Mercury for the next several evenings after sunset, particularly around 5:15 pm local time. Find a cloud-free, low western horizon free of trees and buildings. If you have a compass on your phone, use it to find 230° in azimuth (i.e., west southwest). It will be low – only a few finger widths above the horizon - but bright enough to see against the twilight sky. It sets just before 6 pm local time, so if you haven't seen it by then, try the next night.
Venus continues as the extremely bright, white object high in the southwestern sky in early evening. This week, it sets between 8 and 8:30 pm local time. Following the ecliptic upwards and southward, tiny reddish Mars sits about 15° (1.5 fist diameters held at arm's length) to the upper left of Venus. Despite its much greater distance from us, it still outshines all the stars around it. This week Mars sets about 9:45 pm local time.
(Above: We have a few more chances to spot Mercury in the western sky this week (shown at 5:20 pm local time) before it sinks sunward. Follow the Ecliptic to the upper left to find Venus and Mars, which converge over the next couple of weeks. They set well after dark.)
Mars is travelling straight towards Neptune, which is sitting about midway between the stars Lambda and Sigma in Aquarius the Water-Bearer). Over the course of this week, Mars will reduce the separation from 9° to only 4° (about four finger widths) from the tiny blue planet. Blue-green Uranus is sitting just inside the western (right) arm of the "V" of Pisces the Fishes. The waning Moon makes seeing these two ice giant planets easier this week.
Bright, white Jupiter's position in the eastern morning sky mirrors Venus' evening beacon. This week, look to the southeast from its rise time about 2 am until sunrise. By 7 am, it's well above the southern horizon. By the weekend, you can begin to look for Saturn very low in the eastern sky as dawn breaks. It'll get higher and easier every week.
(Above:  Taurus is the first of the bright winter constellations to rise, carried high in the southern sky by late evening in December annually. He's tilted over as if charging nearby Gemini and Orion. His triangular face features the bright orange star Aldebaran and many easy to observe double stars. The Ecliptic passes through the bull, resulting in frequent visits by the planets and occultations of his stars by the moon. The outer rim of the Milky Way passes nearby.)
Treats in Taurus the Bull
Every year in early December, the distinctive constellation of Taurus the Bull returns to our evening skies, rising as darkness falls and crossing the sky through the night. It's one of a handful of distinctive winter constellations that are easy to recognize with naked eyes. It contains many wonderful objects to observe in small or large telescopes – from spectacular star clusters to a supernova remnant and more. Let's talk about some of its treats you'll spy during a winter stroll, and others that make setting up your telescope on a cold winter evening worth your while.
The constellation of Taurus is located on the ecliptic, just north of the celestial equator, making it visible almost globally. With the dim constellations of Cetus the Whale, Pisces the Fishes, and Aquarius the Water-Bearer lying just to the west of it (on the right), it makes quite an entrance as the late autumn nights lengthen. Taurus is the first in a parade of much brighter and better-known constellations - Orion the Hunter, Auriga the Charioteer, and Gemini the Twins. Being on its eastern side, they rise later in the evening. To the north sits Perseus the Hero and below Taurus is dim Eridanus the River.
Taurus is dominated by several elements that combine to make the bull. A large triangular arrangement of stars form the bull's face, with the bright reddish star Aldebaran sitting at one vertex, marking his baleful eye. Two bright stars sitting 15 degrees to the east are the tips of his horns. Above the face, the little Pleiades cluster marks his hunched shoulders, and to the east, a handful of less prominent stars form his chest and forelegs. The rest of him is missing. When he rises in the east, he is tilted sideways, horns down and legs extended - as if he's charging the twins of Gemini. His doesn't straighten up until after midnight when he enters the western half of the sky.
(Above: Taurus contains interesting targets for naked eye, binoculars, and large and small telescopes. In addition to the close by and bright Hyades and Pleiades open clusters, the double star 47 Tau at bottom center, the eclipsing binary star Elthor, the very young star t Tau at far right, and the Crab Nebula near Zeta Tau are rewarding telescope objects.)
This week, Taurus rises about 4 pm local time and climbs high into the southern sky around midnight, before descending westward to set around 6 am. To find it, continue the line formed by Orion's belt westwards (upwards in early evening, or to the right later on) about two outstretched fist diameters (or 20°) until you reach bright Aldebaran. If Orion hasn't risen yet, you can look high in the east for the little cluster of blue stars called the Pleiades. Taurus is about 12° below it.
Taurus' triangular face is actually one of the nearest open star clusters to us - only about 150 light years away. It's called The Hyades, named for the five daughters of Atlas in Greek mythology. It actually contains several hundred stars, with a half-dozen or so readily seen under moonless suburban skies. It's a lovely target to view in binoculars. By the way, Aldebaran is actually not part of the cluster. It is less than half as far away!
One of my favorite objects in Taurus sits about one and a half fist widths above the bull's face. It is the beautiful star cluster known as The Pleiades, or the Seven Sisters. It's also designated Messier 45 (or M45), part of Charles Messier's famous list of comet-like objects. The Pleiades is made up of the young, hot blue stars Asterope ("A-STER-oh-pee"), Merope, Electra, Maia, Taygeta, Celaeno, and Alcyone that are indeed related – born of the same primordial gas cloud. In Greek mythology, they were the daughters of Atlas, and half sisters of the Hyades. To the naked eye, only six of the sister stars are usually seen, with their parent stars Atlas and Plione huddled together at the east end of the grouping. Under magnification, hundreds of stars appear.
The cluster is about 450 light years away, and makes a wonderful target in binoculars or a telescope, where many more siblings are revealed! A large telescope under dark skies will also reveal blue nebulosity around the stars – this is reflected light from unrelated gas that the stars are passing through. Galileo was among the first to observe the object in a telescope. In 1610, he published a sketch made at the eyepiece. Not surprisingly, many cultures, including Aztec, Maori, Sioux, Hindu, and more, have noted this object and developed stories around it. In Japan, it is called Suburu, and forms the logo of the eponymous car maker. Due to its shape, some people mistake the Pleiades for the Little Dipper.
You can read about many more interesting sights in my column here .
(Above: The radiant point for the Ursid Meteor Shower is near Polaris. Starry Night software simulation.)
Ursid Meteor Shower
It's definitely meteor season! The Ursid Meteor Shower is a short and modest meteor shower that peaks on the morning of Thursday, December 22nd. Unfortunately, the waning crescent Moon in the pre-dawn sky will dampen the show. The debris causing the shower is derived from Comet 87P/Tuttle. At the peak, in a dark sky, one can expect to spot 5-10 meteors per hour. The meteors can appear anywhere in the sky, but they will appear to be travelling away from a point (the Radiant) near the North Star Polaris.
Keep looking up to enjoy the sky! I love getting questions so, if you have any, send me a note.
