CNers have asked about a donation box for Cloudy Nights over the years, so here you go.  Donation is not required by any means, so please enjoy your stay.
2
THE (UN)OFFICIAL CLOUDY NIGHTS ASTRONOMICAL GLOSSARY
Apr 01 2015 03:00 AM |   Doc Willie  in Articles
THE (UN)OFFICIAL CLOUDY NIGHTS ASTRONOMICAL GLOSSARY
by the Contributors to Cloudy Nights
Edited by Willie Yee
Introduction
This glossary was complied largely from a thread called "Astronomy Terms for Fun" on the General Observing Forum of Cloudy Nights. I edited them, putting them in alphabetical order, and formatting them to dictionary style. Some of the humor may have been lost in this process, since many of them built on the previous posts. I have tried to preserve some of that by using dictionary devices such as q.v. and cf. Those wishing to experience these in the original may peruse the originating thread.
Like many such lists, these are best taken in small doses. Printing them out and leaving them next to the toilet in the observatory (you do have a toilet in your observatory, don't you?) is one recommended option. The editor offers his sincere appreciation to all the contributors and admiration for their intelligence and sense of humor displayed in these entries.
* * *
5 minute exposure: What invariably leads to frostbite on one's nether regions after nature calls while at the exclusive dark sky site in Northern Alaska.
Absolutely Perfect Skies at an amazing dark site: Perfect time for your telescope to break down and to find out your binoculars are out of collimation.
Accretion disc: What forms around one's mid-section from using non-light beer in one's light bucket.
Actual price: Price you paid for equipment. See Retail price.
Acute Eyesight: what your averted vision was busy with (e.g. the location of a "sunspot," q.v.).
Adapter: Get her used to idea of that expensive new thing you're thinking of buying. (Oh, who are you kidding: you're going to buy it!)
Albedo: A large muscular man from New Jersey who collects gambling debts with a hammer.
ALPO: Dog food.
AlTaz: Amateur astronomer from Southern Australia
Amateur: One who pays for the privilege of viewing thru a telescope. See Professional.
Amateur Astronomer: A person who pays someone to send him what he is supposed to believe he should have.
Aperture: 1) What you are always buying more of to see it. 2) Storage space left on your smartphone
APO triple: a mix of vodka, gin and Bacardi, (its colour free). . . though it can make things blurry.
Arp: A sound made after drinking a beer.
Artificial star: What the influx of reality TV has created.
Astrology: What your senile Aunt Matilda thinks you do on Saturday night.
Astronomer: When the person sitting next to you on the plane asks what you do and you want to continue the conversation.
Compare:
Astrophysicist: When the person sitting next to you on the plane asks what you do and you do NOT want to continue the conversation.
Astronomy CCD: An extremely simple camera that costs twice as much as a complex DSLR.
Astrophoto: Proof that money CAN'T buy happiness.
Astrophotography: Foreign language curse phrase uttered after hours of struggling with nothing to show for it.
Autoguider: A device which removes the tedium of manual guiding and adds the frustration of centering a suitable guide star.
Averted vision: 1) What one uses at the dinner table after buying an expensive eyepiece. 2) Watching women at the beach when your wife is around. 3) Maintaining eye contact while speaking to a pretty girl.
Backyard Astronomy: Misleading term for amateur astronomy I have heard since day one in this hobby that would lead one to believe that you must depend on your own property to enjoy this hobby... Do we call other outdoor hobbies backyard golf, backyard fishing, or backyard hunting or backyard backpacking?
Baffle tube: The dumbfounded feeling one gets after watching modern television.
Baffling: What happens to many newcomers at outreach events
Bahtinov mask: The headgear one has to wear to keep from freezing one's face into an ice cube while at that exclusive dark sky site in Northern Alaska.
Barlow: Dims and blurs objects which are too bright and too sharp
Betelguese: Goopy stuff that gets on your mirror/lens/corrector plate after a large insect lands there.
Big Bang: Result of a Gas Giant, q.v.
Big Dipper: 1) An improperly balanced Dobsonian. 2) A fat cowboy.
Big telescope: 20" reflector, 14" SCT, 8" achro, 6" APO
Binoculars: Tool guaranteeing upside-the-head from your wife at the beach. POW!
Binoviewers: 1) Just to confuse the cyclops among us. 2) What she says when you mention buying it.
Black hole: 1)Your eyepiece budget. 2) The bit of driveway that always trips you up in the dark.
Bob's Knob: A sensitive item, the adjustment of which has forever changed the experience of astronomy for my friend Bob.
Bolide: What streaks overhead just as you bend down to pick up something and/or step into the john.
Boundary layer: The last thing your allen wrench or screwdriver must pass through before making contact with the primary mirror
CaK scope: Device for determining if the viewer is younger than 30 years.
Camelopardalids: Term used to describe crushing disappointment due to persistent could cover. See ISON.
Caps: Used in frustrating the heck out of an astronomer when lost.
Cassegrain: Two mirrors placed in a precise configuration that allows you to burn money faster than ever before.
CAT: Computer Aided Telescope. See DOG.
Catadioptaract (neologism): a Mak or SCT develops a large hazy blemish on its corrector lens.
Chromatic aberration: Someone put a dent in your '57 Chevy.
Clear skies: 1) That which is *never* at your current location, wherever that location may be. 2) The period of time during the full Moon. 3) Very rare astronomical event to be cherished for a long time Equation to predict odds of clear skies C= M x W / E x D where C = odds of clear skies M= Moon Phase (note new moon = zero) W = Number of hours you have to work the next day (use zero if you have the day off) E= Effort which takes into account the distance you have to drive and the size and number of telescopes that you set up (The more effort the bigger the number) D=Desirability which is defined as a combination of the darkness of the skies and the rarity of the event ( Lunar eclipses and meteor showers bring especially high values to D)
Clear Sky Clock: Three rows of white boxes that induce rage.
Clouds: 1) Opaque covering over the Earth which protects us from moonless nights and astronomical events. 2)100% cloud cover: Total eclipse of everything.
Cloudy Nights: ......like there's any other kind....
Cloudy Nights Classifieds: A place full of stuff you had no idea you ~needed~ yet end up buying five minutes later.
Collimation: 1) To confuse and then explain in terms which is even more confusing. 2) Too big of a deal is made about it. When it's a little off, it doesn't make any difference in how your objects appear. 3) A branch of amateur astronomy like Lunar, planetary, and deep sky observing. Detailed instructions show how you can spend hours enjoying and fretting over it.
Collimator: Device for intimidating newcomers from ever owning a Newtonian telescope.
Coma: What the Missus may threaten if I were to buy a large apochromat.
Comet: Gritty white powder you do NOT want to use to clean those eyepieces.
Cor Caroli: That girl who lived across the street when I was a kid that we used to throw snowballs at.
Coronal Mass Ejection: Too much Mexican beer last night.
Corrector: What she used to perform the Flocking, q.v.
Corrector plate: 1) Observing session timer built into all catadioptric scopes. Fogs over when it's time to go to bed. 2) Device for collecting dew. Proposed renaming: Collector plate.
Craigslist: Yet another reason for your wife to say, "No more telescopes!"
Credit Limit: Synonym for astronomy wish list; proportional to Magnitude Limit.
Crown and Flint: Perfect name for an astronomy pub.
Dark frame: 1) What you just spent 4 hours taking. 2) What one ends up filling the whole memory card with after forgetting to remove the lens cap from the camera while at the exclusive dark sky site in Northern Alaska.
Dark matter: 1) Excellent for flocking telescopes. 2) What's left of you after your wife catches you looking at women at the beach. 3) What the dog deposited in the back yard just before dark. Watch your step.
Dark skies: Cloud cover.
Dawes' Limit: A new futuristic (copycat) movie coming out soon, about how the human race must find a way to defeat the machine army who is bent on destroying their human creators.
Declination: 1) What lawyers have caused to happen to the world. 2) Response to an advertisement for a 50 mm 600X Tasco telescope.
Diffraction limited: 1)Redundant term. Everything is limited by diffraction. 2) Most noted upon retirement or the loss of a good job, causing one to be able to spend far less on astronomy equipment; "I got diffraction of what I used to bring home in my bank account. Time to chose between eating and selling scopes." 3) Degree of math knowledge of most people these days.
Diopter: A lens that makes the view fuzzy so that fuzzy eyes can see clearly.
Dobsonian: A cheap telescope that cons you into buying eyepieces that each cost more than the telescope itself.
DOG: Desperate Object Groper.
Double star: Brad and Angelina; alternatively, whoever Jen is mixed up with these days.
Doublet: Favourite drink, see Crown and Flint.
Dust: An insignificant material known to cause extreme concern and obsessive behavior, esp. in the amateur astronomy community.
Eccentric: What my neighbors think I am.
ED: The type of glass used in a slightly flaccid refractor
Emission nebula: What you walk into when following a gas giant.
Equatorial mount: Device to confound the user and put the finderscope and eyepiece in mutually incompatible places. Tracks objects beautifully.
Equatorial wedg(i)e: a rite of passage for astronomers crossing the international dateline.
Exit Pupil: One who is expelled from school.
Eye Relief: 1) Halle Berry. 2) not to be confused with iRelief, the new public bathroom finder app from the Apple store.
Eye Candy: That scope, eyepiece, accessory that you think you gotta have, but you really don't need, but you pull out the plastic to get it anyway.
Eyeguard: Something to keep you out of trouble at the beach.
Eyepiece: 1) The part of your scope that's responsible for you being unable to see things. 2) not to be confused with iPeace, the new diplomacy app from the Apple store.
Eyepiece case: An individual who owns many and yet covets many more eyepieces. Either 1) has empty holes, indicating the need for more eyepieces, or 2) has no empty holes, indicating the need for another or a larger eyepiece case.
Eye(piece) of newt: An optical ingredient used when brewing mixed metaphors.
Faint fuzzy: 1) Something you can see only if you don't really look at it. 2) 2) How I feel in the morning sometimes. 3) Obsolete term for Diffuse Nebulosity. 4) A mixed drink with a shot of rum, fresh dew from a corrector plate, club soda, ice, and a twist of lime, or just a shot of Beteljuice, put it in a blender or just shake it up, and pour it in a frosted glass and enjoy. Or, just leave out the rum, that way DSOs won't look faint and fuzzy in your scope.
Field of View: 1) A good observing site, 2) Almost a Kevin Costner movie.
Field stop: 1) That wall you run into just past the goal post. 2) That danged fence that someone always puts around an otherwise perfectly good dark observing site.
Finder: What you have to do when she's lost.
Finder scope: 1) A tool used to catch your hair on fire while solar viewing. 2) A small refractor that points in an entirely different direction than the telescope to which it is attached. 3) A device used to look at blank sky and out of focus trees.
Flat frame: What happens to one's telescope's superstructure after being mishandled by the airline's baggage handlers after flying back from the exclusive dark sky site in Northern Alaska.
Flocking: 1) What happens to the biggest telescope at a star party. 2) What my mother did to me for riding my tricycle in the road.
Fluorite: To be considered when you can't reach the eyepiece.
Focal length: How far I have to hold star charts away from my face to see them.
Focal length extender: What I had to create after turning 40 (see focal length)
Focal Plane: 1) an older Kmart flying machine. 2) The incessant, distracting, bright dotted track one ends up with on every single frame while trying to image the most active meteor storm of the century.
Focuser: 1) Knob you constantly fiddle with when viewing objects 2) device used to change the blurriness of an object from one side to the other
Full Moon: A powerful device capable of clearing heavy cloud to make faint astronomical objects accessible. But not visible.
Galaxy: cheaper than a Fairlane 500.
Gas Giant: One who can clear a room quicker than lightning. (Dogs and cats have also been known to be such).
Gaseous Nebula: see Gas Giant.
German Equatorial Mount: 1. (Hey! This is a family site!) 2) A simple device that makes you look like an idiot when you first try and figure it out.
Globular Cluster: A collection of water spots on your primary mirror inducing an urgent desire to clean it.
Godzilla audio track: Recordings of astronomers who just dropped an eyepiece or scope onto concrete.
GOTO: Goes Off Target Often.
Grab-n-go: 1) The neverending quest to find a scope that weighs far less and shows far more than is actually realistic. 2) A move you sometimes have to use when you drink a lot of coffee while observing. 3) Name for a singles bar. Cf: "Size Matters".
Great Red Spot: Appears on your pants leg after you whack your shin on your tripod in the dark.
Halton Arp: A rebel I admire who had the guts to stand up to the big bang establishment.
Horsehead: What Al Bedo may leave in your bed if you fail to pay.
Image stacking: The process of reducing 10GB of blurry images to a 10MB image that's slightly less blurry.
Inferior conjunction: That guy/gal you used to be married to/dated you would just as soon forget.
ISON: Term used to describe crushing disappointment due to unanticipated break-ups.
JPEG: Setting you forgot to change on your DSLR. See also: astrophotography
Large dob: 1) Instrument for collecting atmospheric dust samples. 2) A compensatory purchase that is often made by the owner of an ED (q.v.) instrument.
Laser collimator: Way of getting us to believe our Cheshire collimators are obsolete.
Barlow Laser collimator: makes both of the above obsolete.
Lens: Its not Len's, it's mine!
Lens cap: Small round device that is used to identify observing site in daylight.
Lens Cover: Cloud filter.
Len Scap: Quiet observer from t'north of England. Partial to real ale.
Lens coating: Spend a fortune on something you can't even see.
Light Bucket: The container in which one stocks various forms of low calorie beer.
Light Pollution: Misnomer. Milky Way blotting out what would other wise be a dark, dark night.
Ludicrous: Astronomical unit of Speed if you are Rick Moranis..... Low tech. Astronomy: makes me obsolete.
Magnitude: The brightness of an object you can't quite see with your current telescope.
Mare Frigoris (the "Sea of Cold"): Wife's disposition when she looks in your eyepiece case and finds distinctive green lettering. "Something new?" She asks.
Mare Tranquillitatis (Latin for Sea of Tranquility): Wife's disposition when no new equipment has been purchased.
Mars: Planet that would always look like a mushy red smudge even if you were standing on it.
Martian Opposition: Those who whine about spending money on space exploration.
Meade: Fermented in an old cave. See Crown and Flint.
Messier list: Very untidy observing notes.
Messier object: 1) What my garage looks like from one day to the next. 2) Any teenager's room.
Meteor storm: The angered frustration on CN of astronomers after another spectacular fails to materialize. See also Comet.
Milky Way: Excellent late night observing snack. Also Galaxy (UK observers only).
Moon phase app: Vacation planner.
Nadir: Consumer Advocate.
Nagler: Someone who argues over the price of expensive astro accessories. (Apologies to Uncle Al).
Naglers: The children running around the scopes at star parties
Naked eye observing: 1) Occasionally misunderstood term resulting in embarrassment at a public star party. 2) The act of enjoying the stars while reclining one's hot tub, and enjoying an adult beverage. 3) Nudist optometrist.
Narrow FOV: What politicians actually have. See Objective (2)
New "Cosmos" series: dull.
Newtonian: Collimation needs near Newtonian genius.
North American Nebula: what is keeping you from enjoying clear skies if you live in North America.
Objective: 1) Buying a bigger telescope. See Secondary. 2) What politicians claim to be. See Narrow FOV.
Open cluster: A loose collection of stars that looks exactly like all the other collections of stars in the neighborhood.
Opposition: 1)a period of severe turbulence in our upper atmosphere caused by another planet's proximity to Earth. 2) When your slow motion knob runs into your mount.
Orion: An Irish astronomer.
O'Ryan: The Irish constellation yet.
OTA: Protective device that prevents damage to your mount when it gets knocked over. See also: crumple zone.
Outreach: 1) Trying to keep people away from your telescope. 2) How far you can stretch to catch a falling eyepiece.
Overview Effect: Adding up the total cost of your gear and the total number of nights you observed in the last 3 months.
Parsec: Astronomical unit of distance if you are smart. Astronomical unit of time if you are George Lucas.
Pascale: The amount of space you have to set up your large refractor at a big star party: 1 sq meter. (Get it? One Newton per sq meter)
Periodic error: 1) I keep buying inadequate stuff. 2) My girlfriend is pregnant.
Peripheral imagination: It goes without saying aperture-limited wife.
Periodic adjustment: 1) Compensates for misalignment of one's anatomical parts and an observing chair. 2) Secondary use for birth control pills.
Perihelion: Two helions.
Periastron: (I already warned you about this once...)
Petzval: Salty, crunchy snack, good with beer.
Pickering: What she gets to do after you buy it anyway.
Pier: What you do into the eyepiece.
Pinwheel: Term for at least two Messier galaxies.
Photoelectric effect: The tendency for your camera to run out of batteries just when you want to use it.
Planetary observer: Of course I am, it's hard to be anywhere else.
Pleiades: Request to spouse for new astro gear.
Polar Alignment: Another term for frustration.
Polar wedge: When the polar bear sits between your car and your telescope at that exclusive dark sky site in Northern Alaska.
Primary mirror: 1)The heavy, expensive piece of glass that falls to the ground and breaks while moving one's Dobsonian. 2) Tool used in place of averted vision at the beach, when your wife isn't looking.
Professional: 1) One who is privileged to be paid to view thru a telescope. 2) One who rarely, if ever, actually views thru a telescope. See Amateur.
Professional astronomers: People we pay to tell us what we are supposed to believe.
Power Mate: When you are married to Sue French (Apologies, Alan).
Projectile: An ES100 14mm.....just ask Markus
Pulsar: When your heart beat goes up due to a new arrival.
Pyrex: a type of glass used to make cheap bakingware, but which is a magnitude more expensive than other substrates when used for mirrors.
Rage!!: Some kid dumps the rest of his Coke Zero, can and all down your scope tube when you're not looking at a public star party. Solution: Hold the parents responsible.
Redneck mirror cooling fan: Wait until a windy night and point you scope in the wind.
Redneck observatory: Camper with the top cut off.
Refraction: What a refractor does to the flow of cash in your wallet.
Refractor: 1) A tubular device made of glass and cheap metal that somehow can cost more than jewelry. 2) A small telescope that is disproportionately expensive and induces delusions of grandeur in the person who paid for it.
Retail price: Price you told your significant other you paid for equipment. Usually 50% or more less than actual price.
Right ascension: 1) What Republicans hope to achieve. 2) The position of your shoulders when trying to look through a straight:through view finder near zenith. 3) How to get up in the morning when there is a wall against the left side of the bed. Cf: Declination: saying "no" to getting up after all.
Rolloff Roof: What you might do if you fall asleep watching a meteor shower from the top of your house.
Saturn: That upturned garden pot that is just right as an observing seat.
SCT: 1) Supremely Costly Telescope. 2) Superior Compact Telescope.
Secondary: The resulting condition of your bank account. See Objective.
Secondary mirror: 1)The replacement for the heavy, expensive piece of glass that the shipping company destroys en route to your home. 2) Backup for the one your wife took away from you at the beach.
Seeing: 1) What still prevents you from seeing it. 2. A tricky prospect after too many doublets in the Crown and Flint, q.v.
Sirius: I'm not, are you?
Slewing: My speech, observing after a couple of lagers.
Solar Flares: Trousers for the fashion conscious 1970s astronomer.
Star Chart: You buy these in Hollywood to find the homes of celebrities.
Star hopping: Leading cause of foul language, i.e., "Where is that $(^&*$ $*))?"
Star Names: Obscure designations given to "help" you star hop to some deep sky object. (You can keep the star names just give me the coordinates)
Star test: An elaborate way to generate anxiety over perfectly useable optics.
Stars: 1) Reportedly there are sparkly, shiny things out there beyond our protective cloud cover. 2) What my wife says I'll be seeing if I buy any more equipment in the short-term. 3) Those things spinning around your head after your wife whops you on the head for using averted vision at the beach.
Stellar degeneracy: What happens to stars when someone knocks your telescope out of collimation.
Stellarium: Makes paper obsolete.
Stellarview: Too many lagers before observing. Related to beer goggles.
Sunspot: That place at the beach where you always get in trouble with your wife while using averted vision.
Supernova: 1) How your wife reacts when she finds out you were looking at other woman on the beach, unless you're Richard Feynman. 2) The small Chevy with the big V8 engine.
Takahashi: Japanese for 401(k) divestiture.
Telescope: 1) Optical device used in vain to see where one's money has just gone. 2) A hole in the air, surrounded by metal and glass, into which one pours money. 3) (Children's definition) A long tube with a lens at one end, and my daddy at the other.
TeleVue: Seeing HD through a scope.
Tracking error: 1) Sometimes happens to new equipment ordered online. 2) Walking home after an all-nighter at the Crown and Flint.
Trees: Obstructions.
T-Ring: One that is married to the camera.
Tripod: better than 3 individual iPods.
Tripod spreader: Ron Jeremy.
Unitron: A singular tron
Universal Time: What causes you to go outside and set up to see an astronomical event and realize you forgot to subtract and it is really six hours later or earlier.
Uranus: Oh, never mind.
Vindematrix: Selected for the door prize at a German science fiction DVD convention.
Visual back: What one wishes one could have after turning 60.
Waning: A wet day for hunting da wabbit.
Waxing: 1) Polishing car or floor. 2) Removing hair from legs.
White Dwarf Star: It's white. It's a dwarf. It's a star.
Yew Tube: Old English method for building Newtonian reflectors.
Zeiss: a telescope maker that exclusively used lenses made of crystallized unicorn tears.
Zubeneschemali: A Klopstokian delicacy, made from sausage, beets, and slop.
fishonkevin, Mak2007, DoctorNoodle and 6 others like this
