Notes:
Mag is the variable's range in brightness.
Per. is short for Period, the number of days it takes the variable to complete a full period, or cycle, in brightness
Amateur observations of variable stars are especially sought by professional astronomers worldwide. If you are interested in learning more about observing variable stars, or in obtaining a set of variable star charts, contact the American Association of Variable Star Observers at 25 Birch Street, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02178, or visit their Web site at http://www.aavso.org.
Not Available
{   sourceURL:'/catalog/includes/quicklook_miniproduct.jsp?entityId=99837&entityTypeId=4',   sourceSelector:''   }
{         width: 160,         height: 160,         defaultImage: '',         layers: 'Artimg-ObservSun'         }
Observing The Sun
Amateur astronomers usually consider themselves creatures of the night, since that is when the stars come out. But one star, our most important, most impressive star, the Sun, is visible at a much more convenient hour. The Sun bathes the Earth in life-giving light and heat as we orbit a mere eight light-minutes away. By comparison, light from the nearest star beyond the Sun takes more than four years to reach Earth. Astronomers can learn much about the distant nighttime stars by studying the characteristics and behavior of our own, daytime star. For amateur astronomers, viewing the Sun with a telescope is both interesting and fun!
Rather than appearing as a point of light as all other stars do, the Sun displays a disk half a degree in diameter, large enough to reveal fine detail on its visible surface. But with the Sun being so close and its energy so intense, it must be observed cautiously to prevent it from damaging both our equipment and our eyes. The Sun should never be viewed directly without first exercising precaution (except during the short span of totality during a total solar eclipse), so it is critical to know how to look at the Sun before you try.
Safety First!
Extreme care is necessary when viewing the Sun. The intensity of its light, when focused by even the smallest lens, is strong enough to ignite paper. The retina of an unprotected eye will be instantly destroyed, causing permanent blindness! Never look directly at the Sun without a proper solar-protection filter.
Amateur astronomers usually use one of two methods to view the Sun safely. The first and simplest uses a telescope or binoculars to project the Sun's image onto a white screen. Move the screen closer or farther from the telescope to adjust both image size and brightness. Always try to tilt the screen slightly so that it is not in direct sunlight, but rather in shade, to increase image contrast.
A second way to look at the Sun is with a solar filter. Proper solar filters are designed to fit over the front of a telescope or binoculars. By dimming the Sun's rays before they enter the instrument, the dangerously high levels of solar radiation and heat are reduced, preventing permanent damage to both observer and optics.
Never place the filter between your eyes and the eyepiece, since it will be quickly destroyed by the magnified solar energy. Many less-expensive telescopes once came with solar filters that screwed into an eyepiece (a few still do!). They are extremely unsafe, sitting right at the focus point of the light rays. The tremendous heat produced there can crack the filter, instantly frying your eye. If you have this kind of solar filter, discard it immediately.
Projection is wonderful for showing the Sun to a group of people all at once, but usually fails to reveal the fine level of surface detail visible with a filter. Filters provide a more detailed view, though they cost more and allow only one person at a time to view.
Another safety warning: Never look through the finder scope when aiming a telescope at the Sun. In fact, you should cover the front of it with an opaque material just to be safe. Crosshairs exposed to sunlight can melt in just a few seconds, and burns or blindness can result from unintentional exposure of your eyes to light passing through the finder.
Instead, keep an eye on the telescope's shadow on the ground as you move the tube back and forth, up and down. When the tube's shadow is shortest, the telescope should be pointed at the Sun.
What Can You See?
Both viewing methods show the Sun's photosphere, the visible layer of the Sun that produces sunlight. Scattered across the photosphere are dark markings called sunspots. Scopes as small as a 60mm refractor will reveal them. A close look shows that larger sunspots have a darker, central area, called the umbra, surrounded by a lighter region called the penumbra. Single spots can form, but usually spots appear in groups and clusters.
Try keeping a daily sunspot log, noting their number, sizes, shapes, and grouping patterns with pencil diagrams. Track their migration across the Sun's face as it rotates on its axis once every 3-1/2 weeks.
Sunspots are not permanent features on the photosphere, but instead, change in shape and size from day to day. Galileo was first to notice that spots move across the Sun. From his observations in the early 17th century, he inferred that the Sun rotates about once a month. It is now known that the Sun's equator takes 25 days to turn once on its axis, while the poles require 36 days.
The number of sunspots is always changing, increasing, then decreasing over an 11-year period known as the sunspot cycle. During peak activity "solar maximum" there may be dozens of sunspots visible at the same time, while at solar minimum, there may be none at all.
The exact cause of sunspots remains a mystery, but astronomers know that they are associated with irregularities in the Sun's magnetic field. These irregularities lower the temperature of the Sun in their immediate area by as much as 1,500 degrees Celsius, forming sunspots. Appearance to the contrary, sunspots are not really dark. They only appear dark in contrast against their hotter, brighter surroundings. In reality, they are hotter than the surfaces of many stars.
Other Surface Features to Look For
Finally, when using a filter to Sun-watch, look carefully along the solar edge, or limb. Notice how it appears slightly dimmer than the center of the disk? This effect, called limb darkening, is caused by our looking through a thicker layer of the Sun's atmosphere toward the edges than toward the center. With sharp optics and a good eye, you might see some small, brighter areas along the limb. These are called faculae, and mark elevated regions of hot gases. Some observers may also notice that the Sun's surface looks "grainy," an effect called granulation. Each granule is a continent-sized cell of heated gas rising from the core of the Sun.
The Sun has a lot to offer those who want to enjoy the science and hobby of astronomy during daylight, too. And with solar max now upon us, it is a great time to meet the star of our sky show.
Not Available
{   sourceURL:'/catalog/includes/quicklook_miniproduct.jsp?entityId=99839&entityTypeId=4',   sourceSelector:''   }
{         width: 160,         height: 160,         defaultImage: '',         layers: 'Artimg-Sketching'         }
Sketching at the Telescope
Despite the advent of photography and CCD imaging, many amateur astronomers today prefer to chronicle their observations by making eyepiece renderings. Sketching at the telescope, however, does more than create a personal observing record. It hones the observer's perception skills.
Say you look at a star cluster for a few minutes. In that time you may note whether it is rich or sparse, contains predominately bright stars or dim or a mixture of both. Afterward, you would come away feeling as if you "saw" this cluster.
But let's say you sketch it. Now you may notice that some of its brighter stars appear reddish; that the chains form a kind of pattern; that what you thought was a sparse cluster actually contains myriad faint members. Instead if five minutes, you may spend half an hour scrutinizing this object, after which you would come away feeling that you "observed" this cluster.
All you need to get started is a red astronomer's flashlight, an inexpensive sketchpad, and a sharp pencil or two. Before making your sketch, circumscribe a circle—not too small—representing the field of view and note where the cardinal directions fall in the eyepiece. Don't forget to write down the date and time of the sketch, the telescope and magnification used, and a brief description of seeing conditions.
The eye may not be able to accumulate light like a photograph, but it often can see finer detail. That faint, fuzzy thing you saw last night might not appear as faint or fuzzy once you try sketching it!
Not Available
{   sourceURL:'/catalog/includes/quicklook_miniproduct.jsp?entityId=99838&entityTypeId=4',   sourceSelector:''   }
{         width: 160,         height: 160,         defaultImage: '',         layers: 'Artimg-AstroBinocs'         }
Astronomy With Binoculars
Budding astronomers today have a greater variety of telescopes to choose from than ever before. Some are complex, computerized marvels, while others offer a more basic approach to stargazing. But even with all of these to entice us, none is more versatile than a pair of binoculars. Indeed, when it comes to touring the universe, two eyes are better than one!
Advantages of Two-Eyed Touring
Observing the night sky with binoculars has many advantages. One of the greatest is how friendly and comfortable binoculars feel. Perhaps this is because they can be used either while standing up or sitting down. What could be more enjoyable than casually scanning the heavens with a binocular while lying back in your favorite chaise lounge?
Another great advantage is their portability. Astronomy on the go! While a telescope can be bulky and takes time to set up, binoculars are compact, lightweight, and ready instantly, either for a casual glance at the night sky or for an in-depth study of the universe.
Binoculars show the "real" sky. Astronomical telescopes flip the sky around one way or another, either upside-down, left-to-right, or both. Thanks to both their upright image and wide fields of view, binoculars keep everything as it was meant to be, making it easier to find your way around when comparing the view you see to a star chart.
The wide fields of binoculars also let us enjoy some sky objects that are simply too large to fit into a telescope's limited field of view. You are probably familiar with some already, such as the Pleiades and the Coma Berenices Star Cluster, but that's just the start! Dozens of sky sights are better appreciated through binoculars than through telescopes.
Research: Binocular Vision is Better
Beyond aesthetics, research shows that an observer's visual acuity is greatly improved by using two eyes instead of only one. Binocular vision enhances our sensitivity to subtle differences in contrast, resolution, and color. Some people experience up to a 25 to 40 percent increase in their ability to detect faint objects through a binocular than through a conventional telescope!
That's a dramatic improvement, but why? Light entering the eye is focused by the lens onto the retina, which converts the image into electrical pulses and sends them onto the brain. The brain then interprets the pulses into the image that we sense. By relying on only one set of pulses (i.e., using one eye), any inconsistencies in the signals will interfere with the final image. With two sets of signals to interpret, however, the brain will merge the pair of electrical messages. The result is the ability to see fainter, lower-contrast objects.
Yes, there are many benefits to touring the universe through binoculars, but perhaps the greatest is that the binocular universe seems much more personal than that viewed through a telescope. By extending our natural, two-eyed view, the cosmos seems drawn to us, and us to it. It is a feeling, a sense of oneness and belonging, that cannot be duplicated any other way.
Choosing Binoculars for Astronomy
The nighttime performance of binoculars depends on the aperture (diameter) of the front (objective) lenses and the magnification provided by the eyepieces. The wider the objective lenses, the more light the binocular will collect and transmit to your eyes. For astronomy, objective lenses of 50mm diameter or larger are recommended. Indeed, 7x50 binoculars (7x power and 50mm objective lenses) are ideal stargazing glasses because they offer plenty of light gathering, good power, bright images, and a wide field of view (which makes it easier to find things). A 10x50 binocular, also a popular size, has the same light-gathering capability but provides higher magnification (10x). The higher magnification may result in a slightly shakier image if you're holding the binoculars by hand. But for astronomy, it's advisable to mount the binocular on a tripod anyway, to prevent arm and neck fatigue from prolonged overhead viewing.
Even better for stargazing are "giant" binoculars with 70mm, 80mm, or 100mm objective lenses. Because they admit more light, they can reveal fainter objects. But beware: such binocs are heavy and will require a tripod for support. Big binoculars often come in higher powers such as 14x, 16x, 20x, or even more. With smaller binoculars, high powers like that would yield very dim images, but larger apertures take in enough light to maintain good image brightness as magnification is increased.
Ten Favorite Binocular Targets
1) The Moon — Wow! You'll see an unbelievable number of craters and rocky mountainous features, all in stunning clarity. Because its surface is so bright, the Moon is best observed during its crescent phases.
2) Jupiter and its Moons — Binoculars will reveal the bright disk of this giant planet, flanked by its four largest Moons, whose positions change nightly.
3) The Milky Way — Scanning along this dense band of stars on a summer night is immensely pleasurable. You'll see countless clusters, knots, vacant dark patches, and nebulous puffs.
4) Sagittarius Star Clouds — The part of the Milky Way near the constellation Sagittarius ("the Teapot") reveals the richest detail in the night sky. It teems with interesting objects, including the Lagoon, Swan, and Eagle Nebulas, the M24 Star Cloud, and a wealth of open clusters. Use a star chart to help identify them.
5) The Pleiades — This sprawling cluster in Taurus appears as six or seven bright stars to the naked eye, but blooms to several dozen in binoculars.
6) The Andromeda Galaxy — Easy to spot with the unaided eye under a dark summer sky, this majestic "island universe" fills a good portion of the binocular field. You'll see its bright core and faint disk, perhaps even the dark dust lane around the edge.
7) The Orion Nebula — One of the most beautiful gems in the sky, this expansive winter nebula glows brightly, displaying intricate wisps and tendrils. At its heart is an easily-split double star and a luminous quadruple star, called the Trapezium, which can be resolved with binoculars of 11x or more.
8) The Double Cluster — Residing halfway between the "W" of Cassiopeia and the constellation Perseus, these side-by-side stellar splashes are a true delight to behold in binoculars.
9) Albireo — A bright double star in the head of Cygnus the Swan, notable for its gorgeous color contrast: one star glows yellow, the other blue. Ten-power binoculars will split the pair cleanly.
10) Scutum Star Cloud — This impressive star field contains the compact open cluster called the Wild Duck and some dark, starless patches.
Not Available
{   sourceURL:'/catalog/includes/quicklook_miniproduct.jsp?entityId=99832&entityTypeId=4',   sourceSelector:''   }
{         width: 160,         height: 160,         defaultImage: '',         layers: 'Artimg-Messier'         }
Star Magnitudes
The stars that dot the night sky run the gamut from bright beacons to dim little pinpricks. To get a little more scientific about it, the brightness of a star (or any other celestial object) is described on a scale of "magnitudes". The brighter the star, the lower its magnitude.
Each digit on the magnitude scale represents a difference in brightness of 2.5 times. So, a 1st magnitude star is 2.5 times brighter than a 2nd magnitude star, and a 2nd magnitude star is 2.5 times brighter than a 3rd magnitude star, and so on. Extrapolating further, a star of 1st magnitude is 100 times brighter than a star of 6th magnitude, which is about as faint as you can see with your unaided eyes.
The brightest star is Sirius in the constellation Canis Major; it has a magnitude of -1.4. Polaris, the North Star, is dimmer at magnitude 2.0. There are about 8,500 "naked-eye" stars-stars of 6th magnitude or brighter.
With a telescope you can see much fainter stars-down to 11th magnitude with just a 60mm beginner's telescope, in fact. That's 100 times fainter than what you can see with just your eyes. Not bad!
But sky conditions also affect star visibility. Light pollution, moisture in the air, or atmospheric turbulence can make stars appear dimmer.
To "rate" your sky conditions on a given night, find the Little Dipper in the northern sky. Compare the stars you see with the chart above, which indicates the magnitudes of some of the stars in the Dipper. What is the dimmest star you can see? That is the naked-eye "limiting magnitude" for that night.
Not Available
{   sourceURL:'/catalog/includes/quicklook_miniproduct.jsp?entityId=99834&entityTypeId=4',   sourceSelector:''   }
{         width: 160,         height: 160,         defaultImage: '',         layers: 'Artimg-ObservDeepSky'         }
Observing Deep Sky Objects
One of the most fascinating aspects of the science of astronomy is the concept of distance. Everything in the night sky is so incredibly remote! Even the closest star to our solar system, the Alpha Centauri triple-star system, is 25 trillion miles away. The thousands of other stars that we see every clear night with the naked eye, as well as the millions of stars visible through telescopes and binoculars, are farther still!
Scattered among those distant suns are fascinating sights called deep-sky objects, a general catch-all phrase that includes a wide variety of celestial denizens. These include huge clouds of gas and dust called nebulas, which can be divided further into emission nebulas, reflection nebulas, and planetary nebulas. The first two are associated with stellar birth, while the latter are expanding shells expelled from dying stars. Star clusters form a second grouping of deep-sky objects. Open star clusters are made up of anywhere from a dozen to several hundred young, chiefly blue-white stars. Most of these stellar swarms lie within the spiral arms of our own galaxy, the Milky Way. Globular star clusters, made up of some of the oldest stars known, surround the hub of our pinwheel-shaped Milky Way. Each contains between 100,000 and a million constituents. Finally, beyond our Milky Way, are myriad island universes called galaxies. Some are spiral shaped like our own, while others are elliptical or irregular in appearance.
Messier and NGC: A Lifetime of Treasures
Deep-sky objects are usually designated by catalog numbers, such as M42 or NGC 869. The Messier catalog, is the most famous listing of deep-sky objects. Created by Charles Messier, an 18th-century comet hunter, this catalog consists of 109 of the finest objects the sky has to offer. Finding all of the "M" objects is a great introduction into deep-sky observing, since most are bright enough to be seen even through modest equipment. The New General Catalogue of Nebulae and Clusters, or NGC, was compiled in the 1880's by John Dreyer and based on observations by the father-son team of William and John Herschel. More than 7,800 objects are listed in the NGC, certainly more than enough to occupy the owners of even the largest backyard telescopes for a lifetime.
Spotting deep-sky objects through binoculars and backyard telescopes is one of the most exhilarating, challenging, and thought-provoking aspects of the hobby of astronomy. To help set you off on the right foot, here is our top ten list of splendors. Few celestial sights rival these exciting objects. All are visible through modest amateur telescopes, and most can even be seen with binoculars.
M44 Beehive Cluster in Cancer (spring)
M51 Whirlpool Galaxy in Canes Venatici (spring)
M13 Great Globular Cluster in Hercules (summer)
M57 Ring Nebula in Lyra (summer)
M27 Dumbbell Nebula in Vulpecula (summer)
M8 Lagoon Nebula in Sagittarius (summer)
M31 Andromeda Galaxy (autumn)
NGC 869 & NGC 885 Double Cluster in Perseus (autumn)
M42 Great Orion Nebula (winter)
M45 Pleiades Cluster (winter)
Beyond the brighter, showpiece members of the Messier and NGC lists are thousands of other deep-sky objects. Most will test your skills as an observer, but that is the thrill of the challenge.
Tips for Deep-Sky Observing
You don't necessarily need to be a veteran amateur astronomer to enjoy deep-sky observing. Here are a few tips from the experts to give you a head start.
Always try to plan your observing session by knowing what objects you want to look for before venturing outside. By first locating each target object on a star atlas during the day, you can make the most out of the night by heading straight for your preselected sights. List the objects in the order in which they will be found, but limit the selection to no more than a dozen. This way, you won't feel the need to race from one to the next.
While it is still daylight, check the optical collimation of your telescope. This is especially important with reflectors and Schmidt-Cassegrain telescopes, whose optics may be shifted out of alignment when they are moved. Then, after it is set up at night, check it again to see if it needs any minor tweaking. Also make certain that all optics are clean. A little grime on an eyepiece can make the difference between seeing an object and not.
Try to find a dark observing site. While it is certainly possible to find deep-sky objects from the center of a city, there is no beating a rural sky. Better still, join a local astronomy club and attend their star parties. Observing is always more fun with a group.
While some of today's telescopes feature computer-aiming devices, it is best to learn your own way around the sky. Star-hopping is the most popular technique for finding deep-sky objects. All you need, besides a telescope or binoculars, is a star chart of some kind and, for lighting, a red flashlight. Aim your telescope at a known, naked-eye star near the target object, then hop between fainter stars until the telescope is pointed at the target's location.
Take your time when searching for faint objects and use averted vision. Instead of looking directly at the target area, look off a little to one side of the eyepiece's field of view. This is called using averted vision. The edge of the eye's retina is more sensitive to dim light than the center, which makes it possible to glimpse faint objects. Another trick for spotting difficult objects is to tap the side of the telescope tube lightly, just enough to jiggle the field of view.
If at first you don't succeed, change eyepieces. It's best to start with low power (20x-50x or so), since images become dimmer at higher powers, and most deep-sky objects are already dim enough! Many people are under the false impression, however, that deep-sky observing can only be done with low magnification. Not true. Medium- to-high power eyepieces are perfect for uncovering small objects like planetary nebulas and galaxies.
Narrowband light-pollution filters may also prove useful, but really only on emission and planetary nebulas. They enhance the contrast between the object and the background sky.
Making a record of everything you observe by taking notes and making drawings is a great way to train your eye to see subtle details (and to remember what you see from one observing session to the next). Jot down all important details of the observation, including the object's catalog number, date and time, observing location, telescope and eyepiece(s) used for the observation, sky conditions and any interferences, and a description of the object. Afterwards, keep everything together in a large observing log.
Above all, sit down, relax, and enjoy the view. Dress warmly enough to be comfortable, but not so that you overheat.
As you peer through your eyepiece, remember this: you are seeing an object so distant that its light left there hundreds, thousands, even millions of years ago, and is only arriving here now. You are seeing this cosmic denizen as it was way back then; you're truly looking back in time. Even more amazing, you are not just looking at a photograph ? you are seeing it yourself, with your own telescope! That?s what makes deep-sky observing so exciting!
Not Available
{   sourceURL:'/catalog/includes/quicklook_miniproduct.jsp?entityId=100118&entityTypeId=4',   sourceSelector:''   }
{         width: 160,         height: 160,         defaultImage: '',         layers: 'Artimg-Astro_Activities'         }
Exploring the Three Realms
There are three "realms" to explore with your telescope. The first is sometimes called the shallow sky: our solar system, including the Sun, Moon, planets, asteroids, and comets. The second is what I call the starry realm: the stars in the immediate neighborhood of our Sun, which make up the familiar patterns of the constellations we see on any clear night. These include double and multiple stars, and variable stars. The third realm is usually called the deep sky: star clusters and nebulae within our own galaxy (the Milky Way), the cloud of globular clusters which orbit around our galaxy, and the countless number of galaxies beyond our Milky Way. All three realms can be studied with any telescope.
The Shallow Sky
The easiest realm for the beginner to explore is that of our own solar system. The Moon is probably the first object at which most people look. It is easy to find, and reveals a rich surface to explore with any scope at any magnification.
Even at 30x the moon is an enjoyable target. The basic eyepieces supplied with most scopes will provide for fantastic detail.
I usually recommend a Barlow for beginners as it immediately doubles the number of magnifications available with any telescope. It's worth spending a little extra and getting a good quality Barlow, such as the Orion Shorty Plus. Using the example of the SkyQuest XT6, the standard 25mm and 10mm eyepieces will yield 96x and 240x respectively when used with the Shorty Plus. I've found 240x to be the "just right" magnification for the Moon.
The best time to observe the Moon is while it's in its partial phases, because the surface features cast long shadows emphasizing their relief. Full Moon, while pretty to look at, is rather like the desert at high noon: no shadows, so no three-dimensional effects.
Some people find the Moon painfully bright to look at through the telescope. One way to handle this is with a Moon filter such as the Orion Neutral-Density Moon Filter; this will reduce the glare to a comfortable level. Another way is to light up the area where your telescope is located, since the Moon only seems bright because we are viewing it from a dark location in a dark sky. Even using a white flashlight will help a lot. Using a magnification over 200x also cuts the brightness.
The planets are another set of popular targets for amateur astronomers. Beginners often have a hard time spotting them, since they look much like bright stars to the naked eye. A telescope will soon reveal the difference: all the stars in the sky, no matter how large or bright, are so far away from us that they all appear as points of light. All the bright planets immediately show disks even at low magnifications. Venus and Mercury are always close to the Sun, so are mainly visible at sunset and sunrise; neither shows much in the way of surface detail, but will show a clear phase similar to the phases of the Moon. Mars is reddish in color and shows a small disk. Again a magnification of 200x or more is necessary.
Jupiter is probably the most rewarding planet for the amateur.
Its four bright moons are easily visible at the lowest magnifications, and can be watched as they change their positions from night to night, and even from hour to hour.
A higher magnification will reveal at least two dark cloud belts on the disk of Jupiter and, if you are lucky, you may catch a glimpse of the famous Great Red Spot, which nowadays is more of a pale salmon color. Colored filters will bring out extra detail.
I've saved the best for last: Saturn is a magnificent sight in any telescope. The rings are easily visible and, if you look carefully, you will spot four or five of its moons circling around it like tiny fireflies.
The Sun itself is also a wonderful object to view, but it requires a special filter and special care to observe safely. I'll talk more about that another time.
The Starry Realm
As I said above, all the stars are so far away that we can only see them as points. However, many stars are either double or multiple. These often provide striking contrasts of color and/or brightness. Two of the finest are visible in the summer: Albireo in Cygnus, a gorgeous pairing of a gold and a blue star, readily seen in any telescope, and Epsilon in Lyra, the remarkable "double double." This looks like a simple double star at first, but as you increase the magnification, you discover that each star in the pair is itself a very close double. Other stars are variable in brightness, and are studied by advanced amateur astronomers.
The Deep Sky
Beyond the stars in our immediate neighborhood lies the deep sky: star clusters, nebulae, and galaxies. Because of their distance, these objects are often faint and hard to see, and usually require a trip to a place with a darker sky, if you normally observe from the city or the suburbs.
Although scopes like Orion's IntelliScopes will guide you to these objects, most other telescopes require a bit of knowledge of the sky and some tools. First of all you will need a good map; Orion's Deep Map 600 Star Chart is a handy "road map" for the sky. Like a road map, it folds into a convenient pocket size, but, unlike most road maps, it is printed on plastic so that it won't get soggy with dew.
An ordinary flashlight will dazzle your dark-adapted eyes, so a red flashlight is essential for reading your map. I find the Orion RedBeam II flashlight to be particularly handy. Even better is the DualBeam version: it has the same red LEDs, but can switch to white light for observing the Moon and for finding those odds and ends that you drop into the grass at your feet! Both these come with nice lanyards so you can hang them around your neck and never misplace them.
There are so many deep sky objects that it's hard to know where to start. For that, I'd recommend a good guide book, such as Phil Harrington's Star Watch. If you want a better understanding of where all these objects fit in to the universe, I'd also recommend Terence Dickinson's NightWatch, one of my all time favorite books.
With your new telescope and these basic tools at hand, the sky is the limit!
July 2005
Geoff has been a life-long telescope addict, and is active in many areas of visual observation; he is a moderator of the Yahoo "Talking Telescopes" group.
Not Available
{   sourceURL:'/catalog/includes/quicklook_miniproduct.jsp?entityId=100251&entityTypeId=4',   sourceSelector:''   }
{         width: 160,         height: 160,         defaultImage: '',         layers: 'Artimg-Constellation_Focus'         }
Constellation In Focus: Scorpius
For those of us in mid-northern latitudes, it's probably best to start low; the underbelly of Scorpius skirts the horizon, making observation tricky.
The Scorpius Jewel Box is actually two open clusters in close proximity: the top one loose, and the lower one tight. A great binocular target.
NGC 6242 is an open cluster, and NGC 6281 is an open cluster with nebulosity.
C69 or "The Bug Nebula" (aka NGC 6302) is an interesting planetary which looks, at first glance, like a galaxy. The western side of the nebula has a prominent lobe with a tapered end while the eastern side is noticeably blunt.
NGC 6383 is a dim, wide cluster with nebulosity.
M6 is a bright and obvious open cluster which makes for an easy binocular target. Telescopes show rich detail and M6 is seen to be aptly named, "The Butterfly Cluster".
Three globular clusters sit close to Antares. M4 and M80 are well known, but a challenge is NGC 6144 because it sits so close to the 1st Mag red supergiant.
Antares itself is 600 lightyears away and glows with a luminosity 12,000 times greater than our own sun.
This area rewards binocular users generously. There are seemingly endless textures, patterns, star clusters and odd little clouds, all of which are well within the grasp of even basic optical aids.
July 2005
